
Instructor-Mate: 
AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform
By
AROUA ET – TASSAFI - 202211528
JANA AlMAJANNI - 202211741
MERNA ElMEHALAWY - 202210088
MOHAMAD HESHAM KADAH -202211517 

A Capstone Project Report
Submitted to the College of Engineering
In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for
The Award of the degree of Bachelor of Software Engineering at 
Al-Ain University


Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
December 2025

© 2025 Arua, Jana, Merna, Mohammad
Instructor-Mate: 
AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform
By
AROUA ET – TASSAFI - 202211528
JANA AlMAJANNI - 202211741
MERNA ElMEHALAWY - 202210088
MOHAMAD HESHAM KADAH -202211517
APPROVED BY:
______________________________________________
Dr. . Yazeed Ghadi  Advisor
College of Engineering, Software Engineering Program

Dr. .Khubaib Alam  Internal Examiner
College of Engineering, Software Engineering Program


______________________________________________
Dr. Tarik Elamsy, Internal Examiner
College of Engineering, Software Engineering & Computer Science Program


APPROVAL FOR SUBMISSION & DECLARATION

I certify that this project report entitled “Instructor-Mate: AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform” was prepared by Aroua, Jana, Merna and Mohammad has met the required standard for submission in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the award of Bachelor of Software Engineering at Al Ain University of Science and Technology, Abu Dhabi.



Approved by,

Signature	:   _________________________
Supervisor	:   
Date 	:   _________________________
ABSTRACT
In this capstone project course we present the Instructor-Mate: AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform, a system that addresses the growing challenges faced by instructors in higher-education institutions who work across multiple disconnected digital systems. Instructors must manage teaching tasks, attendance, assessment design, reporting, and cross-campus coordination using isolated decentralized tools that increase workload and reduce efficiency. Capstone I focused on the analysis, specification, and architectural design of the platform, including functional and non-functional requirements, use-case modeling, UML diagrams, and system architecture. Capstone II presents the full implementation and testing of the proposed system as a working prototype.
The implemented system combines artificial intelligence to automate repetitive tasks such as attendance processing through AI-assisted facial recognition, assessment generation using large language models, and automated warning report writing. At the same time, the system provides features such as course workspace management, an AI document assistant powered by Retrieval-Augmented Generation, and attendance statistics and analytics for instructors. The resulting prototype demonstrates that a unified intelligent platform can successfully consolidate the disconnected tools that instructors rely on into a single academic environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure ‎2-1 Time Line for LMS	14
Figure ‎2-2 LMS Enrollment Share in 2024	15
Figure ‎2-3 The Moodle quiz builder	16
Figure ‎2-4. Question Type Distribution	22
Figure ‎2-5. Detailed Question Type Statistics:	23
Figure ‎2-6. Retrieval-Augmented Generation Workflow	28
Figure ‎2-7. Visual Question Answering (VQA)	30
Figure ‎3-1. Software Development Life Cycle	35
Figure ‎4-1 Use Case Diagram for the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform	59
Figure ‎4-2. Sequence Diagram – UC02: Generate Assessment	65
Figure ‎4-3. Sequence Diagram –UC01 Manage Workspace (create workspace)	67
Figure ‎4-4. Sequence Diagram – UC07: Record Attendance	68
Figure ‎4-5. Activity Diagram - AI Powered Instructor Assistant Platform	70
Figure ‎5-1. Five-Layer Architecture of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform	74
Figure ‎5-2. Class Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform	79
Figure ‎5-3. State Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform	81
Figure ‎5-4 Database Schema	83
Figure ‎5-5 Entity Relationship Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance	84
Figure ‎5-6 Signup Screen	86
Figure ‎5-7 Login Screen	86
Figure ‎5-8 Profile Screen	86
Figure ‎5-9 Workspace Home Screen	86
Figure ‎5-10 Select Semester Date	87
Figure ‎5-11 Workspace Info Screen	87
Figure ‎5-12 New Section Screen	87
Figure ‎5-13 Workspace Sections Screen	87
Figure ‎5-14 Students by Section Screen	88
Figure ‎5-15 Materials Screen	88
Figure ‎5-16 Configure Assessment Screen	88
Figure ‎5-17 Assessment Screen	88
Figure ‎5-18 Link Materials Screen	89
Figure ‎5-19 Ask AI Screen	89
Figure ‎5-20 Generate Encodings Screen	90
Figure ‎5-21 Students With Encodings	90
Figure ‎5-22 Attendnace Home Page	90
Figure ‎5-23 Attendnace Page	90
Figure ‎5-24 Attendance not Taken Yet	91
Figure ‎5-25 Collapsible Panel Take Atten..	91
Figure ‎5-26 Collapsible Panel Export from..	91
Figure ‎5-27 Statistics and Warnings Screen	91
Figure ‎6-1 FastAPI Connection	93
Figure ‎6-2 Database Tables	93
Figure ‎6-3 database.py	94
Figure ‎6-4 models.py	95
Figure ‎6-5 API Connection	96
Figure ‎6-6 api_service.dart	96
Figure ‎6-7 main.py	97
Figure ‎6-8 Signup Screen	97
Figure ‎6-9 signup_screen.dart	98
Figure ‎6-10 auth_routes.dart	99
Figure ‎6-11 Login Screen	99
Figure ‎6-12 login_screen.dart	100
Figure ‎6-13 auth_routes.py	101
Figure ‎6-14 Profile Screen	101
Figure ‎6-15 profile_screen.dart	102
Figure ‎6-16 auth_routes.py	103
Figure ‎6-17 Workspace Home Screen	103
Figure ‎6-18 workspace_home.dart	104
Figure ‎6-19 workspace_routes.py	105
Figure ‎6-20 Add Workspace Upload UI (Date Picker Screen)	106
Figure ‎6-21 workspace_home.dart	107
Figure ‎6-22 workspace_routes.py	108
Figure ‎6-23 Workspace Info Screen	109
Figure ‎6-24 workspace_detail.dart	110
Figure ‎6-25 workspace_routes.py	111
Figure ‎6-26 Add Section Popup Screen	112
Figure ‎6-27 Workspace Sections Screen	112
Figure ‎6-28 workspace_sections.dart (CREATE)	113
Figure ‎6-29 workspace_sections.dart (READ)	114
Figure ‎6-30 section_routes.py	115
Figure ‎6-31 Import Student List Screen	115
Figure ‎6-32 workspace_sections.dart (CREATE)	116
Figure ‎6-33 workspace_sections.darts (READ)	117
Figure ‎6-34 student_routes.py	118
Figure ‎6-35 Materials Screen	119
Figure ‎6-36 Assessment Configure Screen	119
Figure ‎6-37 workspace_detail.dart	120
Figure ‎6-38 Materials_routes.py	121
Figure ‎6-39 Assessment Screen	122
Figure ‎6-40 Link Materials Screen	122
Figure ‎6-41 workspace_detail.dart	123
Figure ‎6-42 quiz_routes.py	124
Figure ‎6-43 Review Screen	125
Figure ‎6-44 review_screen.dart (DISPLAY)	126
Figure ‎6-45 Manual Edit UI	127
Figure ‎6-46 AI Edit	127
Figure ‎6-47 review_screen.dart – Manual Edit	128
Figure ‎6-48 review_screen.dart – AI Edit	129
Figure ‎6-49 api_service.dart – AI Edit	130
Figure ‎6-50 Export Popup UI	130
Figure ‎6-51 review_screen.dart Export	131
Figure ‎6-52 quiz_routes.py – AI Edit	132
Figure ‎6-53 Ask AI Screen	132
Figure ‎6-54 workspace_detail.dart	133
Figure ‎6-55 workspace_routes.py	134
Figure ‎6-56 Generate Encodings Screen	135
Figure ‎6-57 generate_encodings_screen.dart – upload Function	136
Figure ‎6-58 FaceRecognizer.py – generate_encoding_from_image and detect_faces Functions	137
Figure ‎6-59 attendnace_routes.py encoding/upload endpoint	138
Figure ‎6-60 Attendnace Home Screen	139
Figure ‎6-61 workspace_detail.dart - AttendanceTab	140
Figure ‎6-62 Attendnace Screen	141
Figure ‎6-63 Take Attendnace by Video Collapsible Panel	142
Figure ‎6-64 api_service.dart – uploadCheck Function	143
Figure ‎6-65 api_service.dart - previewAttendnace Function	144
Figure ‎6-66 attendace_routes.py – attendance/process-video endpoint	145
Figure ‎6-67 face_recognizer.py – detect_faces Function	146
Figure ‎6-68 attendnace_service.py – process_video_preview Function	146
Figure ‎6-69 Confirm Attendance	147
Figure ‎6-70 api_service.dart – getStudentsForSection Function	148
Figure ‎6-71 api_service.dart – confirmAttendnace Function	149
Figure ‎6-72 pg_repository.py - save_attendance_for_lecture	150
Figure ‎6-73 Export Attendance and Export from database Collapsible Panel	151
Figure ‎6-74 api_service.dart – exportAttendnaceCsvFromDb Function	152
Figure ‎6-75 file_saver.dart – saveToDownloads Funtions	153
Figure ‎6-76 pg_repositories.py – fetch_attendance_rows Function	154
Figure ‎6-77 Saved to Downloads Attendance File	154
Figure ‎6-78 Attendance Record Generated for Lecture 8 DSA 61D	154
Figure ‎6-79 Statistics Screen	155
Figure ‎6-80 statistics_screen.dart	156
Figure ‎6-81 attendance_routes.py – attendance/generate-warning-report endpoint	157
Figure ‎6-82 Generated Warning Report File	158
Figure ‎6-83 Week Overview Notification	159
Figure ‎6-84 Notification History	159
Figure ‎6-85 notification_scheduler.dart scheduling logic	160
Figure ‎6-86 notification_service.dart mobile native setup	161
Figure ‎6-87 in_app_queue.dart web queue	162
Figure ‎7-1 TC-B2	174
Figure ‎7-2 TC-B3	174
Figure ‎7-3 TC-B5	174
Figure ‎7-4 TC-B7	174
Figure ‎7-5 Dashboard must load in under 10 seconds	181
Figure ‎7-6 AI summaries must be ready in under 15 seconds	182
Figure ‎7-7. 10 instructors uploading at the same time	183
Figure ‎7-8. 5 instructors asking the AI at the same time	183
Figure ‎7-9 Unauthorized access is blocked	184
Figure ‎7-10 API keys and passwords are never exposed	184
Figure ‎7-11 AI content only accessible with a valid workspace ID	185
Figure ‎7-12 Wrong file types are refused before processing	185
Figure ‎7-13 Unsupported file type	186
Figure ‎7-14 Workspace not found	186
Figure ‎7-15 Workspaces are stored and can always be retrieved	186
Figure ‎7-16 uploading same syllabus file twice does not create two copies	186
Figure ‎7-17 All workspaces are available	187
Figure ‎7-18 attendance generation is fast for practical use	188
Figure ‎7-19 all returned rows contain confidence	188
Figure ‎7-20 classroom videos are handled securely	189
Figure ‎7-21 Test FileHashService	191
Figure ‎7-22 Test SectionService	192
Figure ‎7-23 TestWorkSpaceService	193
Figure ‎7-24 Overall Results	196


LIST OF TABLES
Table ‎2-1	29
Table ‎3-1: Team Structure	41
Table ‎3-2. Risk and Mitigation Strategy	42
Table ‎4-1. Requirements Traceability Matrix	55
Table ‎4-2. UC01 – Manage Course Workspace	60
Table ‎4-3. UC02 – Generate Assessment	61
Table ‎4-4. UC06 – Seek Instructional Help / Chat	62
Table ‎4-5. UC07 – Record Attendance	63
Table 9 : User Password	164
Table 10 :User Email Address	165
Table 11 :	167
Table 12: Sign Up	168
Table 13: Section Name Equivalence Classes	168
Table 14: Syllabus Upload File Type Equivalence Classes	169
Table 15: Student List File Type Equivalence Classes	170
Table 16: Workspace Management Functional Tests	171
Table 17: Section Management Functional Tests	171
Table 18: Ask AI Functional Tests	172
Table 19: Attendance Functional Tests	173
Table 20: Material Selection Functional Tests	175
Table 21: File Type Validation Functional Tests	176
Table 22: Question Type Configuration Functional Tests	177
Table 23: Review and Edit Functional Tests	178
Table 24: Error Handling and Edge Case Functional Tests	179
Table 25:ExportService	189
Table 26:  Notification Scheduler Tests	193
Table 27: Attendance Unit Test Results	194
Table 28: Unit Test Results	194
Table 29: Login + Sign Up + Assessment Generation	196
Table 30: Work Space + Attendance	198
Table 31: System Testing	199
Table 32: Acceptance Testing	201
Table 33:Problem Faced	203
Table 34:	231



CHAPTER I:
PROJECT OVERVIEW:
This capstone project is about designing and developing Instructor- Mate (IM) an AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform.  Instructor-Mate is a unified platform with artificial-intelligence capabilities to enable higher-education institutions’ instructors to effectively perform their academic, administrative, research and course coordination tasks. The direct outcome of this capstone project is an application which can run on both the instructors mobile as well as their desktop or tablet devices with a connection to backend platform empowered by AI. This application allows the instructor to automated attendance processing, assessment generation, course-workspace management, and automated report creation. Its intended notification system will allow the instructors to promptly have an insight about their daily and weekly tasks. schedule their daily and weekly tasks by providing ahead of time insight of daily and weekly  It also offers a coordination module that assists instructors teaching common courses across multiple sections or campuses by managing meetings, progress tracking, and shared documentation. The desktop and mobile application interface provide a unified hub for instructors’ fragmented tools and resources which reduces repetitive manual effort, improves communication, and enhances overall teaching efficiency.
Background and Motivation
In the private higher-education sector, instructors are expected to maintain a smooth balance between their teaching excellence, research productivity, and administrative responsibilities. A typical university instructor’s workload includes delivering their teaching load lectures, preparing educational materials, grading assignments and exams, supervising students during office hours, taking class attendance. In the same time, they also need to work on their research papers, engage in community activities and work on their professional development, participate in accreditation and quality-assurance activities, as well as fulfilling other endless administrative duties. The competition within institutional environments mandates the successful and sustainable management of these diverse responsibilities. This task is hard to maintain consistently in accordance with the Faculty Workload Taskforce (2024) [3] , which reporting that university instructors face a complex and demanding workload that spans not only academic teaching and  research activities but also many administrative obligations. This finding is also supported by Kanwal et al [2] reporting which also claim that instructors combining multiple responsibilities experience high stress, reduced engagement, and lower performance. This in turn negatively affects student learning outcomes.
To enhance teaching and course management and in order to assist instructors in handling the competing tasks, private universities and colleges gradually adopt digital learning platforms such as Moodle. However, these systems typically function in isolation from other important academic and administrative tools. While the adoption of generative artificial-intelligence tools such as ChatGPT and educational analytics platforms has introduced new opportunities, it has also introduced new difficulties.  This is because instructors must alternate between multiple unconnected tools to ensure compliance with institutional data-privacy policies. Instructors are also required to evaluate the accuracy and appropriateness of AI-generated materials which requires investing additional time in learning and monitoring these contemporary evolving systems. With the rise of AI agents in education, instructors find these tools helpful in automating tasks such as content generation, feedback drafting, and grading support. Nevertheless, challenges persist in areas of transparency, reliability, and academic integrity (Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019; Dwivedi et al., 2023). As a consequence of these listed facts, instructors spend a inconsistent amount of time navigating fragmented systems and procedural tasks time that could instead be contributed to meaningful teaching, research innovation, and stronger student engagement.
In some private higher educational universities, instructors are often required to coordinate common courses with multiple sections offered within the same or across multiple campuses (e.g. Al Ain University). This leads to students, regardless of location, the ability to receive a stable learning experience and be up-to-date on assessments. However, this also brings up extra tasks for the administrators, like scheduling start-up meetings, preparing weekly coordinating reports, signing those reports, and aligning the course material between different classes and multiple campuses. Those activities are usually handled through a simple email or manually documenting them. The activities also lead to an increase towards the instructor's workload and widening digital fragmentation.
Even though it's very common for private universities to use LMS platforms and AI tools in their teachings, there is still no unified integration created by those educational institutions to merge all of the work in one framework. This issue unfortunately decentralizes efficiency and prevents the instructors from fully utilizing those tools and gaining the benefits expected. There has been a need focused on the use of AI tools in education. That need has been increasingly more demanding since the Covid-pandemic, which has made the need for efficiency and integration more important than ever. Using those tools alongside automation isn't only to provide increased quality, but also used to achieve better enforcement with resource optimization and updated standards.
With the introduction of those issues and challenges, this project aims to create and deploy an AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. Our platform is created to connect between the processes that fall under academic and administrative contexts within a single and unified ecosystem. It is going to also assist with repetitive tasks using automating. Those tasks include tracking attendance, generating reports and preparing assessments. The platform aims to reduce the workload on the instructor while also enhancing the quality of their teaching. Other than providing convenience to the instructors, it'll also help with advancements towards the movement to more digital-based resources and tools and with sustaining teaching practices. AI integration with the educational frameworks won't be managed carelessly, instead it'll be treated with responsibility and efficiency in mind. This platform aims to become a smarter and more supportive environment for instructors that prioritizes their well-being, quality of teaching, and performance within the institution.
Problem Statement:
It's been harder for instructors in institutions to manage their teaching, research, and responsibilities across multiple fragmented systems, like the student's registration system, the management system for the various courses they provide, and the LMS they handle. Also, while online learning platforms like Moodle and blackboard help the process of course delivery, they are independent from the other mentioned tools. Instructors also face the issue of complexity when introduced to new AI-based applications. The disconnectivity of those educational sub-systems ends up leading whoever uses those systems to effort duplication, inefficiency, and tiredness. Therefore, the central problem of this study is the absence of an integrated, intelligent platform that unifies instructional, administrative, and analytical tools to support instructors in performing their duties effectively and sustainably.
Proposed solution
This capstone project proposes the development of an AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform to address the challenges of the fragmented instructor’s digital workflows, the extreme administrative workload, and the coordination load across different campuses. Our system is going to centralize all important processes regarding academic and administrative contexts within a single environment that will be easily integratable with current existing learning systems provided by the academic institutions. With this integration happening, the instructors will be able to do all of their work, like managing attendance, report generation, assessment preparations, and gaining access to statistics and analytics without the need to switch between multiple spread out applications.
This system is going to utilize AI capabilities to achieve automatic routine tasks like assessment generation, auto-filling reports, attendance tracking, and generating absence warnings. The system will also have a coordination module which the instructors will use to manage their courses at different campuses by administering start-up meetings, meeting schedules, progress sharing as well as collaborative reporting. It will also send reminders as a notification and automate the preparation as well as the completion of reports of coordinations where necessary or ordered. The module covers the issues that instructors encounter in being in charge of courses in more than one campus.
The platform will come out to one designed on desktop, tablet and mobile devices. Highlighting the portability is used as a way to minimize repetitive efforts, increase the data consistency, and improve the communication of instructors. Having all fragmented subsystems in one system allows making the platform more efficient and effective, and also gives instructors a more sustainable workload.
 Aims and Objectives: 
Aim:
The given project will develop an AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform that will combine AI and learning systems, like Moodle, automating academic and administrative processes. The system will host courses in several sections and campuses and hence enhance efficiency in institutions of higher learning. The site will be introduced as desktop, tablet, and mobile applications that will be convenient, flexible, and integrated.
Objectives:
We are planning to design a system that will address the challenges outlined above so that the system will be aimed to:
To analyze the current challenges faced by instructors in managing academic, administrative, and coordination duties within fragmented digital environments.
To develop an integrated system architecture that combines learning management systems with AI-driven modules to be used in automation, scheduling, and analyzing data.
To design important elements in the system that could be used to carry out more sophisticated activities like assessment generation, report development and attendance monitoring as well as coordinate processes using scheduled meetings.
To introduce a desirable desktop and mobile interface which facilitates accessibility, ease of use, and effective interaction with instructors who work in various campuses.
To ensure accuracy, privacy, and security of data in any AI-enabled process, through proper ethical and technical protection strategies.
To assess the contribution of the system to the reduction of the workload of instructors, improvement of communication and coordination, and institutional quality-assurance.
Scope
The project scope includes developing an AI-based Instructor Assistance Platform that will be used during the instructions in higher education establishments. The main focus will be on AI integration with the learning systems like Moodle in order to provide the organization of tasks. It will be automated to do the required functions such as attendance management, assessment generation, report creation, and meeting documentation where there will be ease of use, quality of the information, and adherence to institutional policies.
The scope of the project includes requirement analysis about the workload of instructors, design of the system, AI-based module implementation, and functionality evaluation, and system usability. The project prototype will be made with the purpose of explaining how AI integration will help with reducing the workload, productivity increase, and teaching experience enhancement without the need to edit or modify institutional infrastructures.
A note to keep in mind, this project's purpose isn't to replace learning systems like Moodle or the institution's databases. It won't be integrated to any financial, registration, or management systems beyond the instructor's allowed privileges. The system will use integration to import and export needed data in different formats between itself and to institutional platforms. Also, cloud based large-scale deployment is outside the project's scope as of currently but may be added into considerations for the chance of a future expansion.
Summary
In this project, we are planning to design and develop an AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. Our main motive is to address the issues faced by instructors who have problems balancing teaching, research, and their other duties across disconnected platforms. Currently, instructors keep switching from system to system for all of their different duties, which leads to inefficiency, effort duplication, and increased workload. Our primary problem is the lack of a centralized and unified platform to help instructors fulfil their tasks effectively and sustainably.
We created this proposition as a form to satisfy the need for a centralized environment that contains all of the essential workflows and tasks with the help of AI. This platform will be able to integrate with existing LMS. It will automate routine and repetitive tasks, including attendance tracking, assessment generation, report creation, and generating absence warnings. The coordination module will also be designed to help instructors to control the course offered in different campuses, course scheduling and sharing of progress, as well as reporting jointly. The app will be installed as desktop, tablet, and mobile client. This is aimed at making the instructors more efficient, effective in teaching and creating more sustainable workload in the institutions of higher learning through consolidating all the fragmented subsystems in a singular platform.

CHAPTER II
LITERATURE REVIEW
Based on the challenges and needs identified in Chapter 1, this chapter evaluates current researches, technologies and practices that are associated with artificial intelligence (AI) in education, learning management systems (LMS) and instructors workload management. The aim is to place the suggested AI-powered instructor platform in the context of existing educational technologies, as well as to outline the gaps to justify its creation. This review highlights the evolution of teaching automation and data management technologies accomplished by earlier systems and research efforts, while also revealing their failure to support fragmented digital processes, coordination across multiple campuses, and an integrated form of support for instructors.
Introduction:
Artificial intelligence has become one the most significant technologies in higher education. It is still redefining the way that teachers teach, test and administer their courses whether in the traditional or online settings. The emergence of digital tools and online learning platforms offers new opportunities to increase the effectiveness and flexibility of teaching, however this technological development also introduces many new tasks and responsibilities upon educators. The instructors in most of the privately based higher education institutions are forced to operate with multiple disconnected systems, which has separated the activities of teaching, assessing, communicating and reporting, which in turn blurs the teacher’s focus. 
Learning management systems (LMS) like Moodle and others have been used to deliver courses, share contents, and assess students. However, these platforms are still limited in terms of supporting critical academic and administrative processes. Therefore, to handle the tasks of grading, attendance, course reports and other administrative records, instructors have to spend a lot of time moving between different systems. It was reported by several studies and researches that such non-teaching repetitive activities takes up a significant amount of the time from the instructors and builds up workload pressure that reduces the time students can use to engage with meaningful teaching and support. These issues were further increased after COVID-19 pandemic and the introduction of online learning modes which made  digital coordination more crucial than ever. 
At the same time, AI-powered technologies such as chatbots, quiz builders, and automatic feedback systems are gaining more and more popularity in educational settings. Even though these tools have significant potential in assisting the daily activities of instructors, the majority of them are implemented in isolation and do not integrate with the institutional information systems. This separation causes duplication of effort and increases the problem of managing data from different sources. For this reason, many researchers and developers have started to explore the need for a single integrated environment that brings together the teaching, administrative, and coordination tasks in one place.
This chapter reviews the related work and previous studies that are relevant to the development of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. This review has been divided into four major areas: 
●	Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED): an overview of the use of AI to aid the process of learning, assessment and educational management.
●	Learning Management Systems (LMS)  and their Integration issues: a description of the features and constraints of existing systems.
●	Instructor Workload and Cross-Campus Coordination: providing research on the topic of workload cooperation between instructors in different campuses.
●	Existing AI Tools and Gaps: a review of current solutions and a discussion of the need of a unified intelligent system.
These sections will discuss the theoretical and technical background needed for the design and development of the proposed AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform.
Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED)
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has already become a natural part of higher education. It also alters the style of education among instructors changing the mode of instruction, evaluation practices and the management of courses. The introduction of advanced digital technologies and online learning opportunities signals new opportunities to make education more effective and flexible. However, at the same time, the implementation of the given technology presents even more work to teachers, most especially to those in institutions that work with several, and, not always, compatible systems to teach, communicate, and report outcomes.
Online learning management systems like Moodle have greatly facilitated the process of course delivery by helping instructors to distribute course materials, create online tests and track the progress of students. However, the majority of the systems do not develop a strong linkage with other administrative and academic systems, forcing teachers to put extra effort into switching platforms to grade, record attendance, and report. Many researches have shown that these non-teaching activities may increase stress levels and reduce opportunities to engage the students and promote classroom innovation [10], [13].
AI-oriented applications, such as chatbots, quiz creators, and automatic feedback systems, have become popular in the educational sector. The tools promise to lighten the teaching burden and provide more personalised services to students. As an example, a number of colleges use AI to predict student performance or generate quiz questions automatically [1], [3]. However, despite these benefits, these tools usually exist outside of the primary institutional systems, maintaining the issue of uncoordinated tool use.
Researchers warn that AI integration into the educational process requires the careful attention of the accuracy, ethics, and privacy of information [2]. Instructors must verify the information generated by AI tools and make sure that it follows institutional rules and professional standards. For this reason, AI should be seen as a tool that supports instructors rather than replaces them.
Learning Management Systems (LMS) And Integration Challenges
LMS History Timeline
The use of technology in education has always been a goal that the majority of educational institutions have tried to achieve. The first learning management system, FirstClass, was introduced in 1990. It was launched by SoftArc. It offered basic features that were considered ahead of their time, such as emails and public discussion forums, allowing students and instructors to collaborate from both school and home (Franconnect, 2025). In 1991, NKI Distance Education Network released Ekko, the first fully featured LMS. It provided features beyond the basic ones and set the foundations of course management and learners’ progress tracking (BIS, 2015). In 1997, CourseInfo developed something that changed the educational world forever: the first LMS to integrate relational MySQL databases. It enabled web-based data management; this LMS is what we know today as Blackboard (Growth Engineering, 2023). In 2002, Moodle (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) was released, marking the beginning of the open source learning management systems. Moodle allowed instructors to customize the learning process and supported plugins for quizzes, forums, assignments, and grading. These innovations were crucial for the learning evaluation; many systems were developed before and after that, but until 2019, LMS were only used as experimental or supplementary tools for course management. However, after the COVID-19 pandemic and the circumstances surrounding it that reshaped the educational process, integrating technology in education became a must rather than a want. It was clear that universities and schools had to find an alternative to carry on with delivering instructions, assessments, and communication remotely in the absence of direct interaction between students and instructors. This shift that happened rapidly drove many, if not all, educational institutions to quickly adopt learning management systems. Overnight, LMS became the primary way of teaching; it was used to deliver lectures, share learning materials, assign and grade assessments, and facilitate communication.  Even after the pandemic, LMSs were never neglected, and instead blended into the learning environment and reshaped it forever. By the end of  2019, in North America alone, Canvas had about  19.2 million enrolled users between students and instructors, Moodle had around 11.3 million, and Blackboard had about 10.6 million.  As of 2025, there are approximately 73.8 million users of learning management systems (Ensaantech, 2025).

Figure ‎2-1 Time Line for LMS

Current LMS Market:
The LMS market is known to grow rapidly, and various platforms are available to meet various educational requirements. Canvas is one of the most popular LMSs, specifically in higher education, where it is valued because of its user-friendly interface, mobile and web-based availability 24/7, and support of numerous third-party applications. Blackboard, being one of the oldest LMS systems, is still used in larger universities and continues to provide support in this direction to the present day. Moodle is known as an open source platform capable of meeting the requirements of institutions that need to be customized and cost-effective (Fortune Business Insights, 2025). Even though they differ in design and specialised functionalities, these platforms do have common goals, which are the digitisation and automation of the learning environment.
The next section  outlines those functionalities that are now being standardised in modern management systems and provides a detailed analysis of their effects on educational and instruction provision.


Figure ‎2-2 LMS Enrollment Share in 2024
Standard Features and Functionalities:
The evolution of learning management systems has continued significantly since they were first introduced, with many new features being integrated to monitor the entire educational experience. Modern academic research indicates that the effectiveness of an LMS is essentially tied to its ability to simplify and streamline the learning process by adopting user-friendly and user-focused features [1].  Course management is one of the core features of LMS, it gives educators the right to design, organize, and administer courses in addition to delivering a variety of learning content such as texts, multimedia presentations, and links to other academic materials.  This offers both instructors and learners an astounding level of flexibility.

Figure ‎2-3 The Moodle quiz builder
Another core function of LMS is assessment creation and grading. Most LMSs support a variety of evaluation tools such as quizzes, assignments, surveys, and discussion forums. For quizzes and other exams, modern LMSs support a wide range of question formats, including but not limited to multiple-choice questions (MCQs), true or false, fill-in-the-blank, short answers, matching questions, drag and drop, essay or long-form answers, and Numerical or calculated questions. This variety provides the instructors with the ability to test students’ understanding in different ways and assign assessments that align with course learning outcomes. Moreover, LMS often includes automated grading features and feedback spaces. This saves the educator a lot time, helps with evaluating students’ performance and identifying the gaps, and allows students to get immediate feedback to support their continuous improvements (Aldabbas et al.,2025).
The Moodle quiz builder, as shown in Figure 2.3, offers a wide variety of question types for instructors. The list covers simple, auto marked options like Multiple choice, True and False, Short answer, and Numerical questions. In addition to advanced ones, like Calculated questions using random values and drag-and-drop. On top of that, Moodle offers adaptable types including Embedded answers and Essay questions, graded manually so educators can check every level of understanding.
In addition to the creation of assessments and automated grading, most LMS software has advanced grade management features, which record the academic performance using digital gradebooks. Faculty can assign different grading scales, such as points,  percentages, or letter grades, and provide weighting on different evaluations. This facilitates the automatic computation of students’ final grades. Some LMSs also provide Analytics tools, including grade distribution visualizations and curving features, which help instructors in reporting, record-keeping, and giving the students constant support for their academic progress. However, many teachers continue to record grades manually, especially for paper based tests, and have to go through the analytics themselves to define what has been learned to create improvement plans.
Another fundamental feature of most  LMSs is communication and collaboration, which is expressed through discussion forums where learners and professors exchange ideas, work on projects, and share announcements. These virtual interactions are similar enough to the traditional learning space, creating a feeling of interest and social presence among the students and instructors.

Attendance Tracking		
One more necessary LMS functionality is student attendance monitoring. Educational organizations use systems such as Canvas, Moodle, and Blackboard to record attendance inside the platform by assigning status like present, absent, late, or excused to students. However, the current attendance systems are still mainly manual, and the instructors often have to mark attendance during every session manually, which is time consuming and likely to result in manual error. Moreover, while basic attendance analytics are available, like student attendance percentages, these platforms do not support proactive tools like notifications that alert educators to frequent absences.
Limitations and Challenges of Current LMS 
Regardless of the wide usage of these mentioned features, modern LMS still show multiple limitations that affect the educational process effectiveness. Most administrative activities are automated, but teachers continue to face a significant reliance level of required manual control and data input.
Manual Workload and Time Burden
Instructors spend considerable time entering grades, uploading materials, and managing attendance, which increases their workload instead of reducing it.
One of the issues that mainly challenges instructors is the time required for LMS management. According to McKinsey & Company, in 2019, the share of administrative tasks on the instructors’ tasks list was 44%, up from 42%  in 2012. Even though some processes are automated, the remaining ones, which include course design, uploading resources, grade book setup, attendance recording, and reporting data collection, build up a heavy workload that distracts and takes away the time that could be assigned to core teaching functions, such as lesson planning, mentoring students, and teaching innovation. This highlights that LMS platforms need to be developed in terms of intelligent, support based solutions that can allow educators to shift their focus on education instead of administration.
LMS systems gather lots of information on student performance, grades, submissions, attendance, and participation. This information is usually spread over various dashboards, each with basic summaries. This fragmented display of data requires the skills of the instructors to identify students’ trends and plan for improvements while gathering data from multiple modules, which is not only time-consuming but also a heavy burden, especially to instructors who teach multiple courses with a large number of students. This results in a passive learning experience, which limits the possibility of receiving personalized feedback and support to students. Recent academic studies are in support of integrating artificial intelligence into LMS systems to enable predictive processing and to convert raw data into actionable information and provide a personalized educational experience (eLearning Industry, 2025).
Reactive rather than proactive functionalities
The scattering of student progress metrics and participation indicators in different LMS modules is a major weakness of current systems, which are often reactive, not proactive. As a result, the instructors have to do most of the monitoring of upcoming deadlines by hand, class planning, remembering previous lessons, scheduling an assessment, matching learning outcomes, and using various interfaces to access the necessary information. The administrative load is overwhelming and most LMS solutions are reactive to faculty behavior and provide limited predictive or proactive assistance.
These systems lack proactive actions, which could facilitate features such as intelligent reminders of future exams, automatic recommendation of study contents, warnings of missing or unfinished course configurations, and custom teaching materials according to students’ performance and gaps in learning. This would lift the burden of organizing, planning, and monitoring everything manually while considering numerous details and deadlines.
Insufficient and limited attendance tracking 
The majority of LMS tools react to actions of instructors but do not have any predictive or proactive features like alerts and automatic suggestions. The issue of attendance tracking continues to be one of the most questionable sides of LMSs at present. Manual attendance recording takes away precious class time, particularly in classrooms with high student populations. It can be up to fifteen minutes or more to record attendance. Human errors are also likely to be caused by the manual approach, such as mistakes in entries, false attendance, and the lack in of application the policies of attendance policies in various sections. LMSs are able to compute simple attendance percentages, but have very minimal analytic capabilities. They do not have an automated warning to instructors when a student is near the absence limits, or solutions to find a correlation between attendance and academic achievement to identify the at-risk students. Therefore, teachers are required to track a record of attendance manually, issue warnings, and make independent decisions.
Report Generation and Documentation Burden
Report preparation as part of institutional assessment, accreditation, and quality assurance is one of the most time-intensive activities that instructors need to carry out. During this semester, the instructors must provide a lot of documentation to check the academic standards and help with the continuous improvement. Such reports require an assessment of how the students have achieved the learning outcomes, the record of their teaching practices, and require the coverage of the content along with recommendations of improvements. Even though grades, attendance, and other data on student performance can be found on LMS, they do not offer much assistance in the form of compiling and analyzing these data. Teachers are required to collect information on various modules by hand, analyse it, correlate the evaluation to learning objectives, and make their reports. Some instructors might use third-party tools to automate part of this process, which involves dealing with a variety of platforms and having to combine the outcomes of individual tools manually, complicating the process. The work under each report takes hours, and the report should be done on each course every semester. The studies have shown that traditional LMSs fail to generate automated reporting, which makes the process unnecessary and time consuming (MDPI, 2024).
Assessment Design and Alignment Challenges
LMS systems have quiz tools, but do not offer much support in creating assessments that are aligned with learning outcomes or course goals. Although the existing LMSs offer powerful features of assessment delivery and assessment grades, question design is not one of their features. When providing good assessments, it is important to carefully fit the questions to the applicable learning outcome, to have the right coverage of the course material, and to choose the type of questions that should be chosen to be challenging to the students and that will strengthen the learning process without bias. The LMS platforms do not help in alignment and the instruction of questions, and are not useful in identifying their gaps in coverage, meaning that the entire burden of checking this falls on instructors who are expected to rely solely on their own knowledge and experience to do so. According to research, generative AI may automatically formulate questions that fit the learning objectives, but that feature has not been implemented in most LMSs (Maity et al., 2024). Even experienced professors may create assessments that fail to align with the desired results and measure what learning students have learned without intelligent support.
Fragmented Workflow 
The instructors need to switch between various systems of grading, attendance, communication, and reporting, which lessens efficiency and lead to the possibility of mistake. Although the individual features of  LMS may be good, they tend to work separately and in isolation of each other. Today, instructors are faced with a very discontinuous digital workspace filled with tools functioning independently. These tools complicate things instead of streamlining the process, as instructors have to navigate between the various platforms and each platform has different login credentials and different data formats.
An instructor might be required to navigate the LMS to manage the course, a spreadsheet, or a separate platform for attendance, Turnitin to detect plagiarism, email to communicate or office hours, and different programs to conduct assessments and grade them. Although each tools are used to address a particular task, they cannot be integrated with one another, which creates significant challenges to the instructors.
Fragmented workspace creates the burden of learning and maintaining. Each new tool increases the workload of the instructor who has to dedicate time to familiarize himself with the interface, its functionality, and constraints, and bring it into the existing working process. This learning is not a one time event, as it happens every time there is an update of the software, and it creates a serious challenge, particularly to instructors with little or no technical experience. The systems with a high degree of functionality may end up overwhelming instead of empowering. As an example, Moodle has more than 23 question types, which can be selected by an instructor in case of creating an assessment. It takes much time to master these options, know the role and appropriateness of all types, and know how to apply it properly. Instructors are time constrained, leading to a tendency to choose those simple forms that are well known, such as multiple-choice or true-false questions, although these forms may be inappropriate in a given situation where other forms can be used to evaluate a student. This means that most of the valuable features are not utilized due not to a lack of value but to the fact that it takes too much time to learn how to utilize them.

Figure ‎2-4. Question Type Distribution
The pie chart shows the question types that are available on Moodle. The chart is dominated by multiple-choice questions that occupy approximately two-third of all question items. The chart shows that the majority of instructors use simple multiple-choice questions intensively.  Source: Moodle.org, “Moodle Plugins directory: Question Usage statistics.”
 

 


Figure ‎2-5. Detailed Question Type Statistics:
This table provides exact numbers that support the pie chart. The top three question types, Multiple Choice, True/False, and essay, make up about 81% of all questions. Most available options see little to no use.
Synthesis: The need for intelligent integrated solutions 
These problems and restrictions are a clear indication of a disconnect between the potential of the existing learning management system platforms and the real world needs of instructors. Even though these technologies have achieved significant progress in the digitalisation of education, they have not led to a significant workload decrease or teaching improvement. Their isolation in many cases cause additional pressure instead of simplifying academic duties, which explains why such an approach requires an AI-based tool that is specifically engineered to address the needs of instructors.
Instead of another generic learning management system, the real possibility is to develop a specialised platform that will help instructors in their routine directly with the help of intelligent, integrated automation. This platform has the potential to combine the aspects of attendance tracking, grading, reporting and assessment to a single platform, making information flow seamlessly from one module to the other. Teaching can be made easier by substituting several disconnected tools with one integrated setting capable of learning and changing according to the needs of instructors.
The bigger picture is to humanise education by using technology. Through automation of repetitive tasks and time-consuming activities, instructors will be able to recover their valuable time. That time can then be spent on activities that are unique to humanity, guiding, supporting, and empowering the generation of learners. The future of educational technology is not to construct more systems, but to construct smarter and more responsive systems.  These systems are converting information into helpful insights, and the systems that are customized to the actual needs of the instructors rather than to some generic user requirements.
Privacy and ethics are matters that should be approached carefully, particularly in the case of the implementation of technologies like facial recognition or data analytics. These challenges will be able to be managed responsibly with institutional policies. Intelligent technologies can make the learning process more personal, effective, and more genuinely human, supporting but not replacing the human aspects of teaching when thoughtfully put to use.
The following section discusses the direct effects of these gaps on instructor workloads and cross-campus coordination, which makes the basis of the suggested AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform.
Instructor Workload and Cross-Campus Coordination
The duties and roles of instructors in the field of higher education are quite numerous and extend way beyond classroom instructions. They include material preparation, marking homework, advising, meeting with students, researching, administrative and reporting tasks. Research has shown that this workload may result in stress, burnout and reduced job satisfaction when the tools available are not effective in facilitating the day to day jobs. [10], [13]. This pressure is made worse by the constant switching between different incompatible systems used to manage attendance, grading, and reporting, especially in those institutions where multiple and unconnected digital platforms are in use.
The aim to use digital systems more often was supposed to make academic work easier, but, however, in most instances, digital systems have brought more problems. Technology can end up consuming more time on the side of the faculty than teaching and research. A study by Anderson and Stinebrickner [10] highlights that the workload experienced by faculty members is still increasing because of the administrative tasks that are not being efficiently automated. Likewise, Ozkan and Kaya [13] found out that teachers have a hard time between teaching and non-teaching functions, which harms their productivity and involvement. These studies confirm that instructor efficiency needs to be worked on, not just in terms of better tools but also in terms of better integration of those tools.
The other growing problem is coordination of different campuses or sections of the course. In most private higher institutions, one course is offered by a number of instructors in various places. This situation requires frequent communication, standardization of material and common reporting. According to De Caro-Barek et al. [11] teaching across campus requires extra planning to facilitate a smooth learning process. Another significance that Yao [12] also presented is the necessity of collaborative models through which instructors can share materials and organise the standards of assessment across campuses. The majority of the available learning management system platforms are not however configured to facilitate this form of collaboration, and instructors are forced to use external tools like email and shared documents.
Lack of coordination may cause variation in course delivery, absence of meetings and overlaps. In those institutions where accreditation and quality assurance are important, such absence of integration also makes it hard to gather the right information at the right time. Therefore, a smart system with cross-campus communication, the ability to schedule meetings, and automated reporting may assist in ensuring the same quality of teaching and less administration overhead. An integration brought about by a single platform controlling course management, communication, and reporting will significantly minimize repetitive workload and will enhance cooperation between instructors. These facts are the driving force to create the proposed AI-based Instructor Assistance Platform that will streamline work of instructors on a daily basis and optimize their interaction at the campuses.
Existing AI Tools and Identified Gaps
This section is a review of artificial-intelligence tools deployed in higher education, with a focus on what contributions they make to instructors in practice. It lists the most widespread capabilities, shows limitations and ethical concerns, and points out areas which are not well developed. This is done with the aim of connecting the academic literature with the practical requirements of teachers and not to engage in the complexity of model internals.
Overview
There is a subpopulation of deep learning algorithms commonly referred to as Large Language Models (LLMs) that are characterized by massive scale either in their number of parameters or the huge amounts of training data they encounter. As general-purpose sequence predictors, the LLM is trained on its specific objective, which is to learn to understand and generate human language by identifying the many faced statistical correlations in the training data.
Language models like GPT 3, GPT 4 and LLaMA 2 have become popular and are now accessible in chatbots and other educational applications. Such systems are capable of text generation, lesson summarization and assist in the creation of assessment with minimum setup. Their ease of use and voting make them appealing materials of the instructors who would want to find more effective ways of organizing their materials or having organized communication processes.
Capabilities Relevant to Instructors
The industrial application of LLMs across numerous industries has achieved a significant range of applications with large-scale processing and production of human language, and moved them from an imagined concept to a fundamental and mandatory resource.
Content Creation and Specialization
LLMs in the higher education setting help the instructors produce course outlines, quizzes, reading summaries, and academic feedback and optimize the time spent on repetitive writing-based tasks. These models will be able to write lesson plans, work out sample questions, and summarize complex readings into small notes based on the syllabus. When applied properly, they may act as brainstorming companions that can assist the instructors to sharpen the ideas, change the tone, and keep the educational products clear.
The same generative abilities can serve the research and documentation tasks. The instructors can use the LLMs to write abstracts or summarize long papers, as well as translate complicated technical writing so that it becomes more learner-friendly. However, outputs of such systems should never go without a review by the factual accuracy as well as adherence to the standards of academic integrity. Being utilized as collaboration tools but not substitutes, the LLMs will be more productive in instruction and meanwhile allow educators to concentrate on quality instruction and student interaction.
 Student Support and Chatbots
LLMs may act as intelligent assistants and aid instructors and students. They can be used in the educational setting in the form of chatbots to respond to frequently asked questions, direct students through course content, and to provide immediate feedback on assignments or concepts. These AI-based systems are useful to aid an instructor to better manage a large classroom by dealing with common questions, thus, leaving more time to engage in personalized learning.
Information Retrieval and Synthesis
LLMs can also be useful in retrieving, organizing, and synthesizing information that is contained in large sets of documents. They can be used by instructors to summarise research papers, extract the most useful findings to use in lectures, or create brief literature reviews to help class discussion. These tools can save time, by automating the collection of information during early stages and enable the educator to concentrate on interpretation and teaching instead of searching [11], [13].
One of the most convenient approaches is Retrieval- Augmented Generation (RAG), which integrates an LLM with an external source of knowledge, like an academic database or institution repository [12]. Upon a user asking a question, the system will recall the relevant references and input the same into the model to get an answer. It is useful because it bases answers on verifiable facts, enhances the  accuracy of the answer, and allows the reference to sources to be done automatically. In the context of education, RAG has the potential to facilitate the development of current lesson summaries, increase the quality of automatically generated materials, and minimize the misinformation risk of AI-assisted educational materials.

Figure ‎2-6. Retrieval-Augmented Generation Workflow
Code Generation
LLMs have become useful tools that can be used by both instructors and learners of courses related to programming. They are able to create example code automatically, finish incomplete snippets or explain the reason behind certain algorithms in natural language. These tools can be used to support computer-science education by allowing instructors to rapidly prepare demonstrations, test student solutions, and generate variants of coding problems [14].
These models also enable instructors to identify syntax or logic mistakes and get natural-language descriptions and suggest corrections that meet the learning outcomes. This increases the speed of feedback and enhances student cognition of the programming concepts. However, the code produced by AI should never be offered without verification, compliance with the policy of academic honesty, or best security practices [15].
When properly used, code-generation tools can improve responsiveness by decreasing the amount of technical work, which in turn means that the instructors will have more time to teach in deeper concepts.
Multilingual and Reasoning Support
Recent large language models have strong multilingual communication and logical reasoning abilities. Teachers working with foreign students can use these systems to access lectures, notes, and feedback in different languages and maintain the context and tone without making them less inclusive and welcoming to students with different languages [16].
Besides translation, LLMs are capable of complex reasoning, like the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting, in which the model gives explanations as to how the conclusion was reached in step-by-step fashion. This strategy allows the teachers to rely on AI tools to create worked examples, illustrate the process of problem-solving or engage students in a sequence of reasoning tasks [17]. Cot based prompts promote transparency and allow students to understand the reasoning process by modeling the reasoning sequence explicitly.
Table ‎2-1

When applied intelligently, these features can contribute to clarity to instruction and make use of better conceptual knowledge, especially in courses dealing with mathematics, logic, and analysis.

Figure ‎2-7. Visual Question Answering (VQA)

Prompt Engineering for Educational Contexts
Prompt engineering is the art of writing helpful input instructions that direct a large language model to produce correct and context rich answers [18]. In teaching, it allows educators to get more accurate, organized, and pedagogic results of AI systems. Instead of adjusting the architecture of a model, prompt engineering is executed at the user level making queries that define roles, establish constraints and create a desirable tone or format of the response.
As an example, a teacher, who creates a quiz, may request an AI to create a quiz based on a certain level of difficulty, a number of questions, and some coordination with the learning outcomes of the course. In a similar manner, prompts can be designed to generate summaries, learning goals or rubrics used to assess a specific subject. The technique can make the content generated by AI more aligned with the teaching objectives and reduce irrelevant or unrealistic outputs [19].
There are a number of particularly helpful prompting paradigms in academic environment. The zero-shot prompting is where the task description is clear and there are no examples, few-shot prompting is where sample pairs of question-answer examples are given to show how the expected result should be, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting is where the model is prompted to explain its rationale step-by-step before providing a final answer [17]. With these methods, instructors can refine AI outputs without the need to retrain their models, making them a cheap and fast substitute for retraining.
Ethically and responsibly adopted, timely engineering can inform the quality of AI-enhanced materials, minimize confusion, and enable an instructor to use AI as a creative and teaching assistant, and not as a substitute.
Ethical Considerations and Challenges
There are a number of operational and ethical issues that should be handled as AI tools get incorporated into higher-ed settings. Although these technologies have the potential to ease the workload and facilitate the teaching process, they also bring an array of issues connected to bias, academic honesty, data confidentiality, transparency, and over-dependence on automation [20], [21].
Bias and Fairness
The language models are large and mirror the data that they are trained on. Unbalanced data may cause bias in the outputs and reinforce the stereotypes or leave out the minority voices [22]. As teachers administer AI-based grading, recommendation, or other feedback generation, teachers must therefore exercise a critical review of the content and offer human oversight to avoid treating students unfairly or misrepresenting them.
Academic Integrity and Authorship
The easy access of generative technologies has raised concerns regarding the idea of plagiarism, authorship, and originality in the teaching context and assessment [23]. Universities should  specify policies outlining which cases and uses of AI are acceptable, and when use is unethical. For example in case of grammar correction or brainstorming, but not in cases of substituting student effort. On the same note, a teacher needs to inform learners about the presence of AI in the materials he designs to ensure his or her integrity and responsibility.
Privacy and Data Protection
Privacy must be maintained  when handling sensitive educational data by AI systems. Information that is exchanged with third-party applications or cloud-based APIs could be personal or institutional [24]. The organizations are advised to make sure that the generated AI services do not violate local and international data-protection laws (e.g., GDPR, FERPA), and to use secure authentication, encryption, and access-control measures.
Transparency and Explainability
The transparency is essential to the association of trust in AI-decisions. The understanding of how AI works to produce an output and what the limitations are should be shared by instructors and students. Applying explainable-AI methodologies or giving confidence scores on automatically created content can contribute to lessening blind usage [25].
Over-reliance and Human Oversight
AI tools should not substitute, but enhance human judgment. Overreliance on automated recommendations can lower the creativity of the educational process and critical thinking. The final decision and accountability of education quality and equity should be left to instructors and guided by the institutional policies that encouraged reflection and balanced use of AI.
Chapter Summary
This chapter has been a review on the development of artificial intelligence in higher education, noting the current increased involvement of deep-learning and large-language-model technologies in complementing the daily activities of instructors. It explored the prime functionalities of AI tools including content creation, chat-based tutoring, and automated assessment, code generation, and prompt-engineering methods and how the features can facilitate teaching and coordination across courses and campuses.
Another issue that was discussed in the chapter is the ethical and operation problems of bias, academic integrity, privacy, and human oversight. In general, the literature shows that even though the current AI tools have achieved a lot, there is still a clear opportunity to have a unified instructor-assistance platform that will implement these technologies in a responsible manner.
The next section highlights the research methodology and the project management strategy that would be followed in developing the AI-Powered Instructor  Platform. The next chapter, IV, will outline the  system requirements and analysis models.

CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY & PROJECT MANAGEMENT
In this chapter we explain how our team approached the development of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform during Capstone I. We tried to follow an organized path that can help us understand what needed to be done, when to do it, and how to divide the workload among our team members. The methodology set the guidelines for planning, analyzing, and designing the system. Project-management practices helped us stay organized, coordinated and on schedule time. 
Introduction
In this chapter, we describe the methodology and management strategy that we used throughout Capstone I. Since capstone I course mainly focuses on planning, requirement analysis, and design, we needed a methodology that supports development, regular revisions, and continuous communication with our advisor. For this, we relied on a structured approach to map out tasks, assign responsibilities, and keep track of progress from week to week. By documenting this process, we show how we worked aligned with the project’s goals and how each task assisted in preparing a complete design for Capstone II.
Research and Development Methodology
Due to the nature of the capstone project I & II  and the two-semester academic timeline, we decided to use a hybrid Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC), mixes ideas from the Agile and Iterative models to produce a hybrid approach. We felt this combination made sense because the project required flexibility especially when receiving supervisor feedback while still keeping clear milestones.

During Capstone I (September–November), our focus was on understanding the problem, gathering requirements, and building the system design. Each iteration allowed us to refine the work. This gave us room to adjust anything unclear or incomplete before moving forward.
Capstone II (January–May) will use the same methodology but for coding, integration, and testing. Since semester II also has a spring break, we plan to use that time for reviewing the prototype and solving any issues before the final evaluation.
Overall, the hybrid model helped us balance structure with flexibility. It allowed us to keep moving forward while continuously improving our work.

Figure ‎3-1. Software Development Life Cycle
Phases of Development
Following the hybrid methodology, the project was divided into multiple phases across the two semesters. Capstone I focused on the early stages, while Capstone II will complete the system.
Planning Phase
At the beginning, we defined the project’s scope, goals, and expected deliverables. We also assigned responsibilities to each member and outlined a timeline based on the academic calendar. We tried to identify Risks early, and we coordinated with our advisor to make sure our approach aligned with university expectations and ethical guidelines.
System Analysis Phase
In this phase, we analyze the difficulties instructors face and identified what the new system must provide. We gathered information from course-coordination procedures, instructor feedback, and general academic workflows. This information helped us list the functional and non-functional requirements and better understand how the system should behave.
Design Phase
The design phase focused on translating the analysis into actual system models. We sketched the architecture, and interface layouts. Several UML diagrams (use-case, activity, and sequence diagrams) were developed to help us understand how users would interact with the system. By the end of this phase, we had a complete design package ready for implementation.
Implementation Phase (To Be Conducted in Capstone II)
This is where the actual coding will start. During Capstone II, the team will develop the system modules using the proper programming language,  appropriate tools and frameworks. The platform will also be connected to the university’s LMS to test interoperability by exporting and importing specific data file formats.
Testing Phase (To Be Conducted in Capstone II)
Once the system is implemented, we will perform various tests, including unit testing, integration testing, and user evaluation. Any issues discovered during this stage will be documented and fixed before the final submission.
Evolution and Maintenance (Beyond Capstone II)
If the system were to be adopted by the university later on, this phase would involve updates, maintenance, and long-term improvements. Although this falls outside the scope of our academic project, we outlined it to show how the system could continue evolving in a real deployment environment.
Since this project is conducted within the scope of an academic capstone, this phase will occur beyond our team’s involvement, as all members will have graduated by the time it reaches production. 
Project Planning and Management Tools
Effective project management depends on proper coordination, communication, and tracking of progress. To maintain organization throughout the Capstone project, our Supervisor introduced us to several tools to support collaboration and documentation. These tools helped us plan tasks, monitor deadlines, share updates, and ensure that all members worked consistently to project progress.
Trello: Task Management and Workflow Tracking
Trello was our main tool for organizing tasks. Each phase (planning, analysis, design, documentation) had its own list, and individual tasks were added as cards. Updating the board weekly helped us stay aware of deadlines and monitor progress.
Google Drive : Document Storage and Version Sharing
The supervisor provided us with a shared google drive on AAU. We used Google Drive to store all project files, including notes, diagrams, and drafts. Keeping everything in shared folders made it easier for every team member and our supervisor to access recent versions.
GitHub : Version Control and Source Code Repository
Even though Capstone I did not include actual coding, we created a GitHub repository early on. It will be used in Capstone II for collaborative development, version control, and tracking code changes.
Communication Tools – Team and Supervisor Coordination
For daily communication, we relied on MS-Teams. Weekly meetings were conducted during office hours in person, and short individual meetings depending on availability. These meetings were essential for reviewing assigned work, discuss challenges, and adjust tasks.
Project Documentation Tools
Microsoft Word template used to prepare report and tables. UML diagrams such as use-case and activity diagrams were designed on Lucidchart. These tools ensured a professional and standardized presentation of project parts that could easily be updated during revisions and also helped us to share it without supervisor and generate high quality images that fits nicely in the report document.
Project Scheduling
The AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform capstone project schedule followed the hybrid SDLC timeline. Capstone I and II were divided into milestones that matched the course syllabus and our internal team structure.
  Capstone I (September to November) and Capstone II (January to May). .
Capstone I Timeline (September to November)
Capstone I focused on the Planning, System Analysis, and Design stages. During this period, we concentrated on problem identification, requirement gathering, and the preparation of system models and documentation. Weekly meetings were held to review progress and receive feedback from the supervisor.  The main outcomes for this stage included:
Project proposal
Literature review
Requirements (FRs and NFRs)
UML diagrams
Interface designs
Capstone I report and presentation
This stage was planned to end by the mid of November to the capstone evaluation committee before the final presentation. 
Capstone II Timeline (January to May)
Capstone II will cover the Implementation, Testing, and Final Evaluation phases. During this period, we will convert the design into a functional prototype, integrate AI features, and test the system against the defined requirements. We are planning to spend the two-week spring break in March for code review, and prepare capstone II documentation and report. The expected outcomes for Capstone II include:
Backend and AI module development
LMS integration
System and unit testing
Final evaluation
Presentation and documentation
Gantt Chart Overview
In the Gantt chart we summarize  the timeline for all the capstone development phases (across Capstone I and II). The chart visualizes overlapping tasks (parallel tasks)  and milestones to ensure proper planning and workload distribution.

Roles and Responsibilities
We organized the team based on individual strengths and interests. Each member had specific responsibilities but could assist others when needed. Our supervisor, Dr. Tarik Elamsy, provided guidance and reviewed our work throughout the semester.
Team Structure
Table ‎3-1: Team Structure
Collaboration Strategy
The team maintained weekly meetings (sometimes daily meetings)  to review progress, assign tasks, and discuss any issues. Each member updated task status through the shared Trello board and confirmed completion by uploading outcomes on Google Drive.
During Capstone I, our focus was on documentation and design outcomes. For Capstone II, roles will remain the same but with more attention to  implementation, testing, and user validation. We hope this continuity ensures accountability and smooth transition between phases.
Risk Management and Mitigation
Our supervisor and early timeline emphasized on possible risks we might encounter throughout the project development. So we created a plan to identify potential problems. During Capstone I, the focus was mostly on risks related to documentation and design. Capstone II will bring more technical risks, such as integration challenges and AI model accuracy.
Table ‎3-2. Risk and Mitigation Strategy

Risks might need review from time to time. The mitigation measures should be updated when necessary. Major risks, such as integration and  time delays, will be reassessed at the start of Capstone II.

CHAPTER IV
REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATION
This chapter presents a detailed analysis of the requirements for the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. Its goal is to define what the system should do, how it should behave, and the constraints under which it will operate. These specifications form the foundation for the system's design, architecture, and implementation in later chapters.
The AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform is not a replacement for existing institutional systems such as Learning Management Systems (LMS) or the university s official attendance platform. Instead, it functions as a centralized, instructor-only AI assistant that brings together the scattered tools and tasks instructors depend on during the semester. The platform acts as a personalized Instructional workspace, helping instructors organize, plan, and follow up on their daily teaching activities.
For each course delivered during the semester, the instructor creates a local course workspace inside the application. By uploading or importing the course syllabus, the system automatically extracts weekly topics, assessments, key dates, and learning outcomes. This information helps to generate structured teaching plans, daily reminders, and upcoming tasks to support course delivery.
The platform also provides local attendance follow-up, which helps instructors in monitoring student participation, identifying at-risk students, and generating warning notices and summary reports. This feature is designed for instructor convenience and does not replace the university s official attendance system.
Artificial intelligence plays a major role in the system by generating tutorials, quizzes, exercises, daily summaries, and course-file components based on the syllabus and session material. These AI-generated materials can be exported in LMS-compatible formats (e.g., Moodle XML), allowing instructors to upload them to external systems without modifying institutional data directly.

The AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform functions as an AI-enhanced instructional tool that simplifies course preparation, daily classroom management, and attendance follow-up. This chapter specifies the functional, non-functional, and domain requirements that are required to ensure that the system supports instructors while still aligned with academic policies, institutional limitations, and existing digital systems.
A Requirements Catalog covering all FR, NFR, and DR entries with their descriptions, rationales, priorities, and statuses is provided separately in Appendix A. The catalog brings together all requirements into a single structured table to support verification, traceability, and evaluation.
Functional Requirements 
The functional requirements describe the core capabilities that the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform must provide to support instructors in managing their courses during the semester. These requirements are organized according to the major features of the system and reflect its role as a centralized teaching assistant, not a replacement for institutional systems (e.g. LMS, Oracle Registration DBMS for attendance, etc).
Functional Requirements:
The functional requirements of the system are presented below.  It lists all the functionalities that the ECPAC system must provide. The requirements are ordered and categorized according to the user roles.
System Access and Authentication
The system shall allow instructors to create an account using their email address.
The system shall allow instructors to log in using their registered email and password to access their course workspaces.
The system shall allow instructors to reset a forgotten password through a secure email-based process.
Course Workspace Management
The system shall allow instructors to create and manage a local course workspace for each course taught during the semester.
The system shall allow instructors to import or upload a course syllabus in supported formats (PDF, Word, text).
The system shall automatically extract syllabus information, including weekly topics, assessments, CLOs, and key dates.
The system shall allow instructors to modify or correct the extracted syllabus information (such as weekly topics, assessment dates, and CLO mappings).
The system shall generate a semester plan derived from the extracted syllabus content.
The system shall allow the instructor to upload/import a student list (e.g CSV, Excel) for a selected course and store the list as part of the course workspace.
Daily and Weekly Teaching Assistant
The system shall display the planned topic, learning objectives, and required materials for each scheduled class session based on the semester plan.
The system shall provide a daily “Class Preparation Checklist” summarizing tasks the instructor needs to complete (e.g., upload materials, prepare tutorial, review attendance warnings).
The system shall bring together attendance statistics, covered topics, and upcoming assessments.
Attendance Follow-Up and Student Monitoring (AI-Assisted Video Recognition)
The system shall allow instructors to record a short video or sequence of images of the classroom for attendance purposes using the mobile device’s camera.
The system shall automatically analyze the captured video to perform face detection and face recognition using student list associated with the course workspace.
The system shall generate a draft attendance list indicating:
Students recognized with high confidence (present)
Students not recognized (absent)
Faces detected with low recognition confidence (requiring confirmation)
The system shall prompt the instructor to confirm or correct any low-confidence or ambiguous recognitions.
The system shall allow instructors to manually override attendance entries before finalizing the session’s attendance record.
The system shall maintain, within each course workspace, an internal face profile for each student. 
The system shall save the final attendance record locally inside the course workspace.
The system shall automatically delete captured video or intermediate image data immediately after attendance processing to ensure privacy.
The system shall generate absence warning messages and at-risk student lists for instructor follow-up.
The system shall allow instructors to review and export the automatically generated warning letters in a reusable format (e.g., Word or PDF) so they can be submitted through official institutional channels.
The system shall generate attendance summaries suitable for weekly summaries, and course file reporting.
Assessment and Tutorial Assistance
The system shall use AI to generate draft assessments such as quizzes, tutorials, exercises, and exam versions based on syllabus topics.
The system shall ensure that generated assessments align with weekly topics and course progression.
The system shall allow instructors to review, edit, and refine generated assessments.
The system shall export assessments in LMS-compatible formats (e.g., Moodle XML) and standard formats (PDF, Word).
The system shall allow instructors to delete or regenerate any assessment upon request.
The system shall allow instructors to select the type of assessment to generate (e.g., quiz, tutorial, assignment, midterm, final exam).
The system shall allow instructors to choose preferred question types (e.g., multiple-choice, true/false, short answer, essay, coding questions, or Cloze-style questions).
The system shall allow instructors to configure assessment parameters such as the number of questions, difficulty levels, and marks distribution.
The system shall allow instructors to map generated questions to specific learning outcomes (CLOs) or weekly topics when desired.
Notifications and Reminders
The system shall notify instructors of daily planned topics and scheduled teaching activities.
The system shall notify instructors of upcoming assessments, deadlines, or required materials.
The system shall notify instructors shortly before each scheduled class start time, based on the course timetable stored in the semester plan.
AI Assistant Interaction
The system shall provide a chat-based AI interface to allow instructors to request summaries, explanations, teaching materials, and assessment items.
The system shall process instructor requests using natural language understanding.
The system shall request clarification when instructor inputs are ambiguous or incomplete.
Administration and Feedback Management
The system shall provide an administrator interface that is separate from the instructor view.
The system shall allow the administrator to view a list of registered instructor accounts.
The system shall allow the administrator to configure basic system settings, such as institutional information and AI service keys.
The system shall allow instructors to submit feedback or bug reports from within the application.
The system shall allow the administrator to view and filter submitted feedback or bug reports (e.g., by date, course, or category).

Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)
Non-functional requirements describe the quality attributes, constraints, and performance expectations of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. These requirements ensure the system operates reliably, efficiently, and securely in the academic environment for which it is intended.
Usability Requirements
The system shall be easy to learn and use, allowing instructors to complete core tasks (attendance, summaries, generating tutorials) without prior training and with a usage error rate below 5% during initial use.
The user interface shall follow mobile usability best practices, including consistent navigation, clear labels, and minimal cognitive load.
The system shall provide meaningful error messages and assist users in correcting mistakes (e.g., low-confidence face recognition).
The system shall provide a wizard-style interface for complex tasks such as generating assessments or course reports.
Instructors shall be able to generate reports, assessment, daily, weekly summaries in less than five steps.
Instructors shall be able to record attendance in no more than three user steps.
Verification: Usability testing with new instructors and observe their interaction with each functionality during time frames.
Security and Privacy Requirements
The system shall authenticate instructors and administrators using secure mechanisms and shall support multi-factor authentication where required by institutional policy.
The system shall ensure that authentication credentials and AI service keys are stored securely.
Attendance videos and face-recognition images shall be automatically deleted after processing is completed.
All communication between the mobile app and backend services shall be encrypted using HTTPS/TLS.
AI-generated assessments, and reports shall be stored securely and never shared without explicit instructor action.
Verification: Security audits, attempt to access unauthorized course workspaces, verification of deletion of temporary video data.
Correctness and Accuracy Requirements
The system shall correctly parse at least 90% of structured syllabus documents, extracting topics, weeks, and assessments accurately.
AI-generated attendance recognition shall achieve at least 85–90% face-matching accuracy, depending on lighting and video quality.
In cases of low-confidence matches, the system shall always request instructor confirmation before finalizing attendance.
AI-generated assessments and summaries shall be based on the syllabus content and course topics without introducing unrelated material.
Verification: Comparison with expected results using test syllabus, controlled attendance video scenarios, and manually validated AI outputs.
Performance Requirements
The system shall process a classroom attendance video (≤ 30 seconds) in under 50 seconds.
Daily dashboard loading time shall not exceed 10 seconds.
Reports shall be generated in under 25 seconds after data submission.
Exporting an assessment or report shall not exceed 20 seconds on a stable network.
Verification: Timing tests under normal load and during attendance capturing scenarios.
Portability Requirements
The mobile application shall run on Android , iOS, Windows 10 or later devices without requiring major modifications.
The system shall adapt dynamically to different screen sizes (phones, tablets, PC).
Verification: Testing on multiple device types.
Interoperability Requirements
The system shall export assessments in Moodle-compatible XML format.
The system shall support export of reports in PDF or Word format for upload into institutional systems.
The system shall not directly write or modify data in the university’s official LMS or attendance system.
The system shall allow importing student lists or basic course information from LMS exports when available.
Verification: LMS import/export trials and integration testing.
Data Management and Backup Requirements
Course workspaces, session notes, and generated reports shall be automatically backed up to the cloud.
Attendance records (non-video) shall be stored securely and retrievable for the duration of the semester.
All temporary video or image data used for attendance recognition shall be deleted immediately after feature extraction.
In case of device failure, the instructor shall be able to restore all course workspaces upon re-login.
Verification: Backup restoration tests and validation of temporary file deletion logs.
AI-Specific Requirements
The AI assistant shall provide consistent and unbiased responses aligned with course content.
The system shall clearly indicate when AI-generated material needs instructor review before use.
Verification: AI output consistency tests and instructor feedback evaluations.
Domain Requirements and Constraints 
This section outlines the domain-specific requirements and operational constraints that control the use of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. These requirements came from institutional policies, academic workflows, ethical considerations, hardware limitations, and real classroom conditions. Together, they shape the real-world operating environment in which the system must function. They also ensure that the platform is aligned with university rules, supports instructors’ teaching practices, and integrates smoothly with existing academic processes and systems.
The system’s main functional users are university instructors who interact with the platform to manage their course-related teaching activities. A separate administrator role exists only for system-level maintenance tasks such as configuring AI service keys, managing access permissions, and reviewing feedback. No student accounts or student interaction with the system are required, and students never directly interact with the platform.
Note: In this report, we present domain requirements and domain constraints together in one unified section. While some projects separate constraints into an independent chapter, we follow the IEEE SRS convention in which constraints are classified as a specific category of domain requirements. Because constraints refer to the real-world limitations defined by institutional policies, technical environments, and classroom conditions, they function as requirements that the system must satisfy.
By combining them, we avoid unnecessary duplication and provide a clearer, more organized view of all external factors that influence the system’s operation. This approach ensures that evaluators can see the complete set of domain-driven conditions in a single, coherent structure.
Attendance Recording Context and Operational Constraints
The system offers AI-assisted attendance recording using video-based face recognition. However, this feature is designed for internal instructor use, supporting follow-up, warnings, and course-file reporting. It does not replace the university’s official attendance system (e.g., Oracle-based platforms).
Instructors must use a mobile device to capture a short video or sequence of images of the classroom for attendance.
Due to real-world classroom conditions (lighting, distance, seating, head movement), the system may experience low-confidence recognitions and must request instructor confirmation before finalizing attendance.
All attendance video data shall be used only temporarily for processing and must be automatically deleted to meet privacy and institutional policies.
The official attendance record must continue to be entered into or retrieved from the university’s authorized system. The app’s attendance data is for instructor convenience and reporting only.
The system must operate within AAU’s academic policies regarding student privacy, the use of facial recognition technologies, and communication of attendance warnings.
Syllabus and Course Structure Requirements
The system relies on a standardized course syllabus format. Although formats may differ slightly between colleges or instructors, most syllabi include weekly topics, CLOs, assessments, and grading breakdowns.
The platform must accurately extract key fields from common syllabus structures; however, instructors should be able to edit extracted content to fix inconsistencies.
Course content, schedule, and assessment dates are controlled by institutional academic calendars, which the system must respect when generating semester plans and reminders.
Institutional Policy and Academic Workflow Requirements
The system must support workflows used by university instructors for coordination, course files, QA reporting, and exam preparation.
AI-generated materials (tutorials, quizzes, reports) must be reviewed and approved by the instructor before being shared or submitted to institutional systems.
Integration with External Systems
 The system must integrate in a read-only, export-only manner with institutional platforms such as LMS (Moodle, Blackboard) and attendance systems.
 The system may import course information from LMS exports when available but shall not modify LMS content directly.
 Quizzes and assessments generated by AI shall be exported in LMS-compatible formats (such as Moodle XML) to allow instructors to manually upload them.
 Attendance summaries and warning letters may be exported to formats that instructors can send manually through LMS or institutional portals.
Mobile Platform and Hardware Constraints
 The system must operate reliably on mobile devices commonly used by instructors (Android/iOS phones, tablets, PC).
 Device camera limitations (resolution, focus, lighting sensitivity) directly influence face-recognition accuracy.
 Some features (video processing, AI generation) depend on network connectivity; the system must provide fallback behavior in cases of weak or lost internet connection.
AI Constraints
Access to AI services requires a valid subscription or institutional license (e.g., OpenAI API key), which must be renewed or maintained by the instructor or institution.
AI responses may vary depending on model updates; the system shall provide options for the instructor to regenerate or refine outputs.
Language, User Population, and Support Constraints
The initial version of the system shall support English-only course content, assuming that the majority of course syllabus and teaching materials at AAU are provided in English.
The primary functional users of the system are university instructors. A separate administrator role exists for system-level maintenance tasks such as managing instructor accounts, configuring AI service keys, and reviewing feedback. No student accounts or student interaction with the system are required.
The system must support instructors with diverse levels of technical skill levels by offering clear guidance and simplified workflows.
Requirements Traceability Matrix
This section presents the Requirements Traceability Matrix (RTM) for the AI‑Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. The aim of the RTM is to ensure that every Functional Requirement (FR) defined in Section 4.1 is linked to at least one use case in Section 4.4. The RTM guarantees complete coverage, prevents missing functionality, and supports later design, implementation, and testing activities.
Table ‎4-1. Requirements Traceability Matrix

The matrix below lists the Functional Requirements on the left and the Use Cases they are associated with on the right. Use Cases were derived directly from the system features and user goals described earlier in this chapter. 
Use Case Modeling
This section presents the use case model for the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. Use cases describe the interactions between users (actors) and the system to achieve specific goals. They provide a functional, user-centered view of the system’s behavior and form the basis for later design, implementation, and testing activities.
List of Use Cases
The following use cases were derived directly from the functional requirements defined in Section 4.1 and represent all major system behaviors that actors can initiate. They provide a complete overview of the system’s functional scope and form the foundation for the use case diagram and later design specifications.
UC00 – Authenticate User 
UC01 – Manage Course Workspace  
UC02 – Generate Assessment  
UC03 – View & Mark Daily and Weekly Tasks  
UC04 – Download/Export Files and Reports  
UC05 – Seek Instructional Help / Chat  
UC06 – Generate Course Reports  
UC07 – Record Attendance  
UC08 – Receive Notifications  
UC09 – Configure System  
UC10 – Review Feedback  
UC11 – Manage Instructor Accounts  
UC12 – Configure Assessment
Actors
The actors in this system represent all external entities that interact with the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. Actors may be human users, external software services, or hardware components that participate in one or more use cases. Each actor is defined according to its responsibilities, interaction scope, and relationship to the core system features.
Instructor (Primary Actor)
The instructor is the main user of the system. The instructor creates and manages course workspaces, uploads syllabi, records AI-assisted attendance, generates assessments and summaries, interacts with the AI assistant, and uses the platform for daily and weekly teaching tasks.
2 Administrator (Secondary Actor)

The administrator performs minimal system-level maintenance. The administrator does not access course content or attendance data. Their responsibilities include managing instructor accounts (activation/deactivation), reviewing feedback or bug reports, and configuring basic system settings such as institutional information or AI service keys.
AI-Processing Module (Supporting System Actor)

The AI processing module presents external AI services used by the platform. It performs syllabus parsing, natural language processing, tutorial and assessment generation, content summarization, and face recognition for attendance recording. This actor is triggered by instructor actions and returns processed outputs to the system.
Note: Internal components such as local storage, cloud backend services, and the database are part of the system boundary and therefore not modeled as actors. External institutional systems (e.g., LMS, Oracle-based attendance platforms) are not directly integrated and thus are excluded from the use case model.
The AI Processing Module participates in three use cases: (1) UC02 Generate Assessment, where it creates and refines assessment items based on the instructor’s configuration; (2) UC05 Seek Instructional Help / Chat, where it provides interactive responses and suggestions; and (3) UC07 Record Attendance, where it assists in recognizing and validating student attendance from captured input. All other use cases are handled directly by the core system without direct involvement of the AI Processing Module.

Among the twelve use cases, four represent the core teaching-workflow functionalities and are described in detail in the main body of this chapter: UC01, UC02, UC06, and UC07. The remaining use cases are documented in the appendix as supporting scenarios.

Figure ‎4-1 Use Case Diagram for the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform
illustrating the interactions between the Instructor, Administrator, and AI-Processing Module with the system.

Table ‎4-2. UC01 – Manage Course Workspace

Table ‎4-3. UC02 – Generate Assessment

Table ‎4-4. UC06 – Seek Instructional Help / Chat



Table ‎4-5. UC07 – Record Attendance
Behavioral Diagrams
This section presents behavioral models that describe how the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform behaves at runtime. While the use case descriptions specify what the system must do, the behavioral diagrams illustrate how the actors and internal components collaborate to realize the core use cases.
Sequence Diagram – UC02: Generate Assessment
The sequence diagram for UC02 – Generate Assessment shows the interaction between the Instructor, the application user interface, the Assessment Manager (application core), the AI Processing Module, and local storage.
The diagram begins when the Instructor opens the Generate Assessment feature and configures the assessment parameters (type, topics, difficulty, number of questions, CLO mapping, and preferred question types). The Assessment Manager sends a generation request to the AI Processing Module, which returns a draft set of questions. The system displays the draft to the Instructor for review and editing, and finally saves the approved version as a course assessment, offering export options (e.g., Word, PDF, or LMS-compatible format).
This diagram shows how the system depends on the AI Processing Module and explains how assessment generation moves from instructor configuration to AI-generated content.

Figure ‎4-2. Sequence Diagram – UC02: Generate Assessment
Sequence Diagram – UC01: Manage Course Workspace (Create Workspace)
The sequence diagram for UC01 – Manage Course Workspace (Create Workspace) illustrates the interaction between the Instructor, the Home Page UI, the Workspace Page UI, the File Processing Module, and the Database. The scenario starts when Instructor opens the course workspace view from the Home Page. The system forward him the Workspace Page and displays the form for adding or updating a course workspace, allowing the Instructor to upload the course syllabus file and provide the course identifier.

Once the Instructor submits the form, the Workspace Page forwards the syllabus to the File Processing Module, which extracts the structured syllabus data (topics, CLOs, assessments, dates, and other attribute). The extracted data is returned to the Workspace Page and displayed to the Instructor for review. The Instructor may edit the extracted information, attach additional resources, and then submits the finalized syllabus data. after confirmation, the File Processing Module saves the workspace data including the processed syllabus information. Finally, the Workspace Page notifies the Instructor that the course workspace has been successfully created.
This diagram shows how a raw syllabus file can be transformed into a structured, course workspace, covering syllabus upload, automatic extraction, instructor review, and storage of the resulting workspace configuration.

Figure ‎4-3. Sequence Diagram –UC01 Manage Workspace (create workspace)
Sequence Diagram – UC07: Record Attendance
The sequence diagram for UC07 – Record Attendance provides a view of the attendance process. The scenario starts when the Instructor opens the Record Attendance feature and the system loads the student list for the selected course. The system then prompts the Instructor to capture or select a classroom video. If the recording is successful, the system extracts frames, the AI Processing Module will do face detection and recognition, and create a draft attendance list indicating present, absent, low-confidence, and unrecognized students. 

Figure ‎4-4. Sequence Diagram – UC07: Record Attendance
The Instructor either accepts the draft as is or edits it by correcting entries. Once confirmed, the system saves the final attendance record and updates attendance summaries and warnings. If the recording fails or the Instructor chooses not to retry, he can switch to a manual attendance entry option, where the Instructor records attendance without AI support. This diagram shows a normal AI-assisted path and a manual backup path, making sure that its working even under failure or low-quality input conditions.
Activity Diagram – Overall Instructor Workflow
The overall activity diagram for the AI Instructor Assistant Platform presents the typical workflow by an Instructor when using the system. The diagram is contain three swimlanes (Instructor, System, and AI Processing Module) to show how responsibilities are distributed between the user interface, the application core, and the embedded AI services.
The activity begins with instructor logging in to the system and proceeds to course-level actions, where the Instructor can create or select a course workspace, and access daily and weekly teaching tasks. From the same workspace, the Instructor can initiate several major flows: AI-assisted attendance taking, where classroom video is captured, processed for face recognition, and converted into draft attendance records for instructor review and submission, AI assessment generation, in which the Instructor configures assessment parameters and reviews, edits, and approves draft questions, and course-file, where the system merge stored data into downloadable reports. The diagram also shows how the system updates summaries, and send notifications to remind the Instructor about upcoming classes, assessments, and at-risk students. Finally, an AI chat interaction path allows the Instructor to submit queries or questions for teaching materials and receive AI-generated responses within the application. Together, these flows show how the platform mange routine teaching activities, AI processing, and data management into a unified instructor-centric workflow.

Figure ‎4-5. Activity Diagram - AI Powered Instructor Assistant Platform
CHAPTER V:
SYSTEM DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE
Introduction 
This chapter presents the design and architectural principles of our proposed AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. In our previous chapters, we dealt with defining user requirements including functional and nonfunctional requirements. We also modeled the most important parts of system behaviour using some UML diagrams. In this chapter, we translate such requirements into a structured implementation design. Our goal is to provide a summary of how the system will be organized, how its components will interact, and how the architecture will support the requirements gathered, analyzed and described in chapter 4.
Layered approach is considered in the design of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. The layered approach assists in maintaining, scaling, and separating concerns. The layered approach has five significant layers:
The Presentation Layer responsible for managing the user interface.
The Application Layer responsible of core business logic handling.
The AI Layer reponsible for intelligent processing and content generation.
The Integration Layer responsible for possible future LMS direct connections.
The Data Layer responsible for storing (importing) and retrying (exporting) information.
This chapter includes architectural diagrams, class and object design, some internal state for key workflows, and details of data organization. Additionally, the chapter also describes interface designs, points out relevant design patterns, and describes the system's strategy for security, validation, and error handling. These design components serve as the technical models for the Capstone II implementation stage.

System Architecture Overview
In this section, the architectural background of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform is described. Even though the current prototype will operate on standalone computers (our personal laptops), the design is scalable and future-oriented to ensure that the system can  become a fully integrated instructional support tool. The system architecture will be based on a layered organization and designed to enhance modularity, maintainability, and extendibility.
The use of separate architectural layers creates certain responsibilities between and among the layers, reducing the complexity level, as well as making the layers easier to debug and allowing independent development of the modules. By using a integration layer, the system architecture also supports potential future integration with LMS platforms such as Moodle. However,  it is important to highlight that the current phase implements only offline import / export (e.g., Moodle XML) due to constraints on our ability as students to have access to the university’s LMS. The following subsections describe the architectural style, each layers responsibility, and the systems logical and physical structure.
Architectural Style		
Selecting the appropriate architectural style is important for building a system that can grow, adapt, and remain stable over time. Accordingly, the layered architecture was selected as the most suitable model for the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform because it organizes software into separate layers. Each layer is indeed responsible for a specific clear set of tasks. According to Sommerville, layered architectures are less coupled and more modular and easier to maintain [2]. Avgeriou and Retalis emphasize that layer plays a role in stability and systematic growth in the systems of educational technologies [1]. All these characteristics are aligned with the requirements of the project, including AI-driven development, attendance processing, reporting, data organization, and future growth.
Though the initial implementation is localized with the capstone course, the layered architecture means that the system can be developed towards more advanced real-world applications. If the university determines institutional implementation or permits LMS integration. In that situation, this extension will not need significant redesign.
Proposed Layered Architecture 
The architecture is structured into the following five layers:
Presentation Layer
The Presentation Layer contains all user interaction components: 
Dashboards.
Menus
Content views
Attendance screens
Configuration dialogs
This layer is there to manage the user interactions, checks inputs, and sends requests to the Application Layer. Separating the UI layer from logic, indeed, contributes to improved usability and can decrease the likelihood of unintended error propagation [2].
Application Layer
This layer carries out the basic business logic. That clearly means that it manages workflows including assessment creation, video attendance processing, course workspace oversight, and report generation. It interacts with the AI layer and data layer via established interfaces. This division guarantees that domain and business logic are centralized, easy to maintain, and testable.
AI Layer
All features that are motivated AI , including CLO mapping, automatic assessment creation, tutorial development, and AI-supported attendance recognition, are included in the AI layer. In addition to locally managing intelligent functions like face recognition for automated attendance tracking in videos, the AI layer will handle interactions with external LLM AI agents (such as Chat GPT) for various tasks. Efficiency, adaptability, and maintainability are all improved by separating AI components [4].
Integration Layer (Conceptually a Future Expansion)
Although it is not implemented in the current prototype we are currently making, the Integration Layer is included as part of the design vision in the future. This is because it will help in future interoperability with institutional systems such as Moodle, SIS platforms, and cloud-based services. Currently, the system supports offline Moodle XML export, but direct API-level integration can be activated through this layer in future versions. LMS systems achieve best when external tools interact through structured plugin and API methods, shaping the design of this conceptual layer.
Data Layer
All forms of data storage, including course files, attendance records, created assessments, drafts, and configuration parameters, are being managed by the data layer. This proudly ensures that the data management is secure, dependable, and efficient. Reliability is improved maintenance is simplified by separating data management from logic [2].

Figure ‎5-1. Five-Layer Architecture of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform
Logical Architecture
This logical architecture shows us how could the main system modules interact across all layers present:
The Presentation Layer interacts only with the Application Layer, ensuring UI independence.
The Application Layer orchestrates all workflows and delegates specialized tasks to:
the AI Layer (for intelligent processing),
the Data Layer (for persistence), and
the Integration Layer (future interoperability).
The AI Layer is given structured input, which can be CLOs, text and video frame and gives out analysis, predictive or generated content.
The Data Layer stores and retrieves all persistent artifacts and also manages working files that are temporary.
The future interoperability of LMS will be based on the Integration Layer, which is not implemented in the presented prototype.
This stratified design also makes the subsystem issues less visible within the user interface, business logic, AI processing, integration mechanisms, and data management, and also makes certain that there is maintainability, modular upgrades, and allows future improvements to be added without affecting existing system functions negatively.
Physical Architecture
Currently, the main layers, Presentation, Application, AI, and Data run together on one machine. The Integration Layer is not active yet and will be used later for connecting to an LMS or other systems. This setup keeps things simple, fast, and available offline.
The AI Processing Module works on the local machine and does not need cloud access. This makes the system a good fit for small classrooms with limited internet. Video frames used for attendance are saved locally and deleted right after processing to protect privacy.
This architecture, however, leaves room for future distributed or cloud-based deployment, which means that AI Layer or Integration Layer may run on distant servers, institutional infrastructure, or cloud AI services. 
Class Diagram
The class diagram is one of the most important artefacts in the field of Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD). As one of the key parts of the Unified Modelling Language (UML) standard it provides a detailed static representation of the system architecture showing the classes, their attributes, and methods and the relationships between objects. This diagram can be used functionally as the code-level blueprint of the system, and an abstract design concept that can be directly converted into concrete code structures. It is not just a good documentation tool, but a powerful visualization methodology where developers and other stakeholders can review the anatomy of the system prior to its implementation. 
The section will give the specifics of the class diagram that will reflect the object-oriented framework of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. The design is done according to the principles and design patterns of the design to make the implementation maintainable and extensible.
Single Responsibility Principle
Single Responsibility Principle will ensure that a class has only one reason to change, as classes express one well defined responsibility. This concept simplifies the change making process, it also simplifies the speed of testing since there is a limited number of behaviors in each class that can be tested. The AttendanceServiceFacade for example, encapsulates only the logic in the to organize the workflow of attendance processing, while  the logic of face detection needs to be in special face detection classes.
Open-Closed Principle
Open-Closed Principle assure that the classes are extensible but not editable. It is achieved through abstract base classes and interfaces, which only specify behavior contract, while allowing concrete implementations to vary. This principle can be traced in the Assessment hierarchy where that abstract Assessment base class sets out typical behavior and concrete assessment such as Quiz, Midterm and Final extend the abstract class without altering it. Similarly, the abstract class CourseWork enables extension by concrete classes like Assignment, Presentation and Project. This practically divides the assessments into two branches: Exam to cover time-limited tests and CourseWork to cover deliverable-based tests. The Exam branch also uses a specific TimeBounded interface to ensure that there is a strict duration constraint that follows the Interface Segregation Principle, where timing logic is applied only where it is required. On the other hand, the CourseWork branch is dealing with due dates and submission. This architecture reflects the Open-Closed Principle and makes it  easy to add and support to new types of assessments by simply extending the correct base class without having to change the current, stable code.
Interface Segregation Principle
The Interface Segregation Principle is also used to eliminate any form of class pollution due to irrelevant methods. An example would be the TimeBounded interface which should include only timing-related operations and it is only implemented by exam-type assessments where there is need to know strict time of start and end and duration calculation, but coursework assessment is not restrained by that aspect.
Dependence Inversion Principle
The Dependence Inversion Principle is the key of the flexibility of this system in sealing the artificial intelligence elements into the system. Top-level classes like AIServiceFacade, ReportGenerator, and AttendanceServiceFacade are not based on the actual implementations but only use abstractions (ILLMProvider, IReportStrategy, and internal service interfaces). This enables the system to customize by replacing OpenAIProvider with any other LLM provider, or replace the YOLO-based facial recognition pipeline with an alternative embedding model, or come up with new report strategies without any changes to any existing production code- this provides real pluggability that is needed of an AI driven platform as underlying models rapidly evolve.
Solid Principles
In addition to SOLID principles, the design also employs GRASP design patterns that are focused on the complexity of an AI-enhanced educational platform. To simplify the complex nature of the subsystems, the Facade Pattern is used in AIServiceFacade and AttendanceServiceFacade to enable them to offer a simplified interface to these complexities. AIServiceFacade covers the arrangement of document processing, prompt engineering and LLM calls using intuitive calls, not revealing to the rest of the application the specific nature of computation. Likewise, the video-to-attendance pipeline (frame extraction → YOLO detection → embedding comparison → confidence scoring → record persistence) is implemented in AttendanceServiceFacade, which offers only one processVideoAttendance(video, sessionID) to the controllers.
Strategy Pattern	
Strategy Pattern, reflected in ReportGenerator, allows the choosing of the right reporting algorithm that depends upon the type of report ordered. It facilitates the introduction of new institutional reports, e.g. Program Learning Outcome mapping or Accreditation Evidence packages, to be a simple matter of just adding a new strategy class with no need to change the ReportGenerator itself, an ideal fit to the Open-Closed Principle and leaves the logic of report generation intelligibly isolated.
Singleton pattern
Singleton pattern is reflected in the AIServiceFacade to make sure that there is only one access point to possibly costly LLM resources as well as to achieve consistent prompt template and caching behavior throughout the lifetime of the entire application. This pattern provides both performance and testability benefits of provider mocking.
The class diagram provided can be viewed as a fully object-oriented architecture, that is also SOLID-conforming, pattern-based, and, most importantly, closely related to the functional needs of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. This careful separation of concerns, heavy reliance on abstractions and the roles of Facade, Strategy, and Singleton dramatically increases its maintainability, testability and uniquely scalable codes that are well positioned to accept any future improvements in large language model or facial recognition algorithms.



Figure ‎5-2. Class Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform


State Diagram
In this section, the state diagram is used to illustrate how the system’s behavior depends on a series of steps or states that change in response to specific events. In the Assessment Generation module of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform, the process is not a simple linear flow; instead, it involves decision points, internal validations, loops, and transitions that depend on both user actions and system responses. Therefore, because of this nature,  the state diagram becomes suitable for modeling such modules. It helps us understand how the system behaves over time (at runtime), how it reacts to errors, how drafting and refinement processes occur, and how the workflow eventually leads to either a finalized assessment or a terminated attempt.
Role of the State Diagram in the System
Moreover, the state diagram manages several important roles. Since the state diagram represents a module's real-time behavior in a system, as we previously stated, it plays a significant role in the system. It first serves as the Assessment Generation feature's behavioral (runtime) blueprint. It demonstrates how the instructor proceeds from setting up the assessment through AI-driven drafting, review cycles, refinement loops, and approval. Essentially, it illustrates how the system responds to errors, invalid inputs, and unforeseen technical problems, ensuring that every potential path is considered and handled correctly and without confusion.
Secondly, it provides uniformity among all system layers. Essentially, class and sequence diagrams are supported by the state diagram, ensuring they follow the same flow. This avoids contradictions or confusion across the documents and helps the team maintain a coherent architecture accordingly. Finally, the diagram also provides a reference during implementation and testing. Developers use it to understand how each step is supposed to work, while testers rely on it to verify that each state and condition behaves exactly as described.
State Behavior Overview
The system allows the instructor to prepare the assessment parameters during the Under Configuration state, which is where the assessment generation process starts. The instructor can begin the configuration, pause for hours or days, and then return without losing progress because this state is purposefully persistent. The system verifies the input when the instructor finally submits the parameters. The system stays in the configuration state and shows a clear validation message if the parameters are incomplete or invalid. On the other hand, if they are valid, another transition takes the instructor to the AI Drafting state. The assessment draft is produced by the AI model once it is in AI Drafting. 
After a successful draft is created, the process flows down to the Draft state, this is where the instructor reviews, edits, and decides whether or not assessment meets the required standard. The instructor may approve the draft, which then transitions down to the Finalized state, the assessment becomes complete and ready for use. Besides, the instructor may request modifications, returning to AI Drafting or choose to delete the draft, which leads to the Cancelled state as a representation of a clean exit from the process. When a critical system-level failure occurs such as the AI service becoming unavailable, a backend crash, a corrupted response the system moves to the Error State. This state is terminal, meaning the process cannot continue and must be restarted manually. This prevents the system from resuming from an unstable or inconsistent condition at that current time. 

Figure ‎5-3. State Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform
As mentioned earlier, the state diagram shows the runtime behavior of the assessment generation module, showing how the system transitions between configuration, AI drafting, review, and finalization. It emphasizes the regular course of states as well as exceptional conditions, including invalid input, cancellation and critical system breakdown. Mapping the states and transitions is an effective way of ensuring reliability, clarity and consistency of the entire process of assessment creation since each state and transition is mapped out in the diagram.
Database Design 
This section presents the database design of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. The database is important for supporting the system’s functionalities, course workspace management, student tracking, attendance monitoring, and AI processing.
This is designed using a relational database model with system entities as tables and relationships being defined using primary and foreign keys. The database structure was based on requirements and was in line with the overall architecture discussed above.
Database Schema Overview
There are multiple tables in the database. Each table is designed to handle a specific part of the platform’s functionality while maintaining data consistency. As you can see in figure 5-4.
Main entities in database:
Instructor 
Refresh Tokens 
Workspace 
Sections 
Students 
Enrollment 
Attendance 
Materials

Figure ‎5-4 Database Schema 
Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD)
The Entity Relationship Diagram represents the logical structure of the database and shows how entities are connected together.
The diagram includes:
Primary and foreign keys 
Cardinality between entities 
Data dependencies across system modules 
This representation helps in understanding how data is shared between different components such as attendance tracking, course management, and AI processing.

Figure ‎5-5 Entity Relationship Diagram of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance
Mobile Graphical User Interface (GUI)  
InstructorMate's User Interface (UI) design was created to reduce cognitive load and allow instructors to easily perform actions such as generating assessment and managing their classroom data. The design system aims to provide clarity, consistency and responsiveness on both web and mobile platforms.
Color Palette and Typography
The app features a contemporary, minimalistic color scheme that promotes productivity and a professional look. The application makes use of a rich, deep purple color to draw the user's attention to important calls-to-action. This is applied to the Floating Action Buttons, the "Generate" buttons, file selection buttons and the user's chat bubbles in the Ask AI screen to name a few. To add depth and structure to the application, we're using a light gray background and white surface elements. This combination not only guarantees legibility but also helps to separate interactive components. Furthermore, the use of semantic colors is used to give immediate contextual cues, such as the vibrant green that is used to highlight the correct options in multiple choice questions in the Quiz Review screen. Lastly, the typography is clear, sans-serif, and highly structured. Large, bold headings delineate pages, while subdued gray subtitles and secondary text (such as file types or timestamps) are used to provide context without changing the overall simplicity of the UI.
Component Architecture and Layout
This system uses a highly card-based paradigm. Primary objects, like workspaces, uploaded syllabus files, and quiz questions are all hosted in separate white cards with rounded corners and drop shadows. This approach has a couple of benefits: it chunks different information into more manageable pieces, and it enables the application to be fully responsive. This design keeps the information stacked on mobile in the form of a vertical scroll, but on desktop or web, the cards can flow into a multi-column grid.
Navigation and Interactive Elements
Navigation is designed to keep the user always anchored. Once in a workspace, a horizontal tab-based menu groups course management tools in a logical way, all without requiring the user to navigate through nested menus.
Task-Specific Interfaces
Workflows were tailored to make use of special UI patterns. Actions that require critical thinking or can be destructive (such as quiz difficulty sliders, to choose the difficulty of the quiz, question type select, to select the type of questions within a quiz and CSV roster upload, to upload student roster via a CSV file) are performed through contextual modals. These dialogs are placed on top of the current view, so the user can complete the action without having to navigate back to the previous view. Additionally, the Ask AI interface uses a conventional chat interface. By displaying the user's queries in blue, right-aligned bubbles and the AI's responses in gray, left-aligned bubbles, the interface mimics conventional messaging apps to enhance the user experience and make it more natural. Finally, the empty states and actions for user input have a clear representation. For instance, the dashed-border "Upload File" drop-zone uses well-known icons to guide the user's actions when the workspace is empty.






CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION
Introduction
This chapter presents the implementation of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform. It describes the technologies, frameworks, and tools used to build the system. The implementation supports both academic and administrative tasks for instructors.
System Implementation Details
Flutter was used to create the frontend of the system to build responsive and user-friendly interfaces that can run across multiple platforms such as desktop and mobile devices which provide instructors with flexible access to the platform. 
The backend was implemented in Python with FastAPI that is in figure 6-1, it was chosen because of  its high-performance, and ability to process API requests. It handles the interactions between the frontend and the database, handles requests by users and coordinates system functionality including attendance recording and data management. The system also integrates artificial intelligence capabilities into the system with the help of OpenAI API keys that allow content generation, creating assessment and intelligent assistance. This enables the platform to support instructors by automating repetitive tasks. 
The facial recognition relies on The face_recognition library that handles face detection, generates 128-dimensional face encodings, and measures similarity between faces using Euclidean distance to determine confidence levels. OpenCV (cv2) is used to read lecture videos frame by frame, control the processing rate, and resize frames to reduce processing time. NumPy supports the numerical operations, storing encodings as arrays and finding the matching student.

PostgreSQL is the database management system used in the platform because its reliable, scalable and supports relational data model and queries. The database is designed using a relational schema that organizes entities such as Instructor, Workspace, Sections, Students, Enrollment, Attendance, Materials, and Refresh Tokens into structured tables. while normalization is applied to minimize redundancy and improve organization. The design also considers AI integration through attributes such as facial encodings and embeddings. Performance is enhanced through indexing of frequently accessed fields. PostgreSQL online interface is presented in Figure 6-2.
Windows Screens and Code Implementation
Database Connection 
Database connection presented in figure 6-3, is the base layer of the backend, which facilitates persistence of data storage and retrieval. The system is developed using a PostgreSQL database, which is connected through the SQLAlchemy Object Relational Mapper (ORM) in Python.
The database instance is connected to the FastAPI application through a connection string that is implemented. A session maker is created to process database operations safely so that every API request receives its own database session that will be safely closed once the operation is terminated. The models.py file applies the declarative base, which integrates Python classes with SQL tables, including the Instructor, Workspace and Student tables.

Figure ‎6-3 database.py


Figure ‎6-4 models.py
API Connection
The API connection layer in figures 6-5 - 6-7 defines the communication layer between the FastAPI backend and Flutter frontend. It makes sure that request and submission of data move in the right direction and are safe.
A centralized API service (usually api.dart or a wrapper of an HTTP client) is the frontend that processes all outgoing requests. It determines the endpoint of the server where the backend is located and forms the right HTTP headers, including the addition of Bearer JWT (JSON Web Token) to secure routes. This centralized scheme will help any network based errors, timeouts or unauthorized responses (401 errors) be processed uniformly throughout the application, and in many cases an automatic logout is automatically determined when the token expires.

Figure ‎6-5 API Connection

Figure ‎6-6 api_service.dart

Figure ‎6-7 main.py

Sign Up Screen 
Signup screen enables new instructors to register to the platform and its implememtation presented in figures 6-8 - 6-10.

Figure ‎6-8 Signup Screen

Frontend
The Flutter interface will have a form that will enter vital information like email, full name and password. The form contains local validation to make sure that the email is formatted correctly, and the password is secure before transferring any data. When clicking on the "Sign Up" button, the frontend forwards a POST request to the backend registration endpoint. This process has a loading indicator to inform the user of the process.

Figure ‎6-9 signup_screen.dart

Backend
When the signup payload is received by the backend, the database is firstly checked to check whether the email is registered. If email is unique, the system employs an algorithm of hashing (eg. bcrypt) to hash the password safely. Plaintext password is never stored. It then creates a new Instructor record and commits it to the database.

Figure ‎6-10 auth_routes.dart
Login Screen 
The platform contains the Login screen of the platform which allows returning instructors to access the platform securely. See figures 6-11 – 6-13.

Figure ‎6-11 Login Screen

Frontend – Login Screen 
The interface has email and password entry boxes. The credentials are submitted to the backend upon submission. In case of success, the backend issues an authentication token (JWT). This token has been stored safely in the application (e.g. through flutter secure storage or shared preferences) and the user is taken to the main dashboard.

Figure ‎6-12 login_screen.dart
Backend – Login Screen
The backend authenticates the login request by checking the database with the given email. In case the user is present it compares password input with the stored hash password. On successful authentication the system issues a JSON Web Token (JWT) that encodes the user id and an expired time. This token is sent back to the client to grant him further requests.

Figure ‎6-13 auth_routes.py
Profile Screen
The Profile screen enables users to see their personal and professional data and manage them as you can see figures 6-14 to 6-16.

Figure ‎6-14 Profile Screen


Frontend – Profile Screen
On initiation of the screen the screen will call an API that will get the details of the current instructor using the stored JWT to decide the person. The UI attaches this retrieved information to the screen and the information shown includes the name, email, department and name of university. It also offers text fields or edits buttons with the help of which the user can update the information that sends a PUT or a PATCH request again to the server.

Figure ‎6-15 profile_screen.dart
Backend – Profile Screen
Backend is dependent on a dependency injection implementation to secure profile endpoint. It receives the request sent, pulls out the JWT contained in the authorization header, decrypts it, and finds the associated instructor in the database. This will ensure that each user only fetches or updates his or her data.

Figure ‎6-16 auth_routes.py
Workspace Home Screen 
The workspace home screen is the initial dashboard of instructors, showing all courses and environments they have access to in figures 6-17 to 6-19.

Figure ‎6-17 Workspace Home Screen

Frontend – Workspace Home Screen 
 After a successful login, Flutter frontend requests the list of workspaces belonging to the current instructor ID. This data is bound to a grid or list view by the UI, with the high-level information presented in the workspace title and the term in use. 

Figure ‎6-18 workspace_home.dart

Backend – Workspace Home Screen 
The backend will have a GET endpoint which receives the instructor’s ID (through the JWT token to ensure security). It is a query of the PostgreSQL workspace table that yields a JSON array of workspace objects.

Figure ‎6-19 workspace_routes.py

Add Workspace Screen
Add workspace is a functionality that is not based on manual data entry but is a result of a simplified file upload pipeline that is triggered by clicking the home screen. Shown in figures 6-20 to 6-22.

Figure ‎6-20 Add Workspace Upload UI (Date Picker Screen)

Frontend – Add Workspace 
It is initiated through a Floating Action Button (FAB). A file picker is used by the Flutter frontend on clicking to enable the instructor to choose a course syllabus (PDF, DOCX or TXT). A calendar dialog immediately follows, where the user will specify the start and end dates of the semester. The parameters of file bytes and date are then sent to the backend. As processing occurs, the FAB is updated to a loading state ("Importing..."), to give immediate visual feedback.

Figure ‎6-21 workspace_home.dart
Backend  – Add Workspace 
The backend has a POST endpoint (/workspaces/upload) that accepts the multipart file data and instructor information. It uses a special service layer to read through the syllabus and automatically extract course information to create the workspace. At the same time, the original syllabus file is pushed to the Firebase Storage where it will be stored permanently, and the dates are parsed and inserted into the PostgreSQL database.

Figure ‎6-22 workspace_routes.py

Implementing Workspace Details
The Workspace Details screen will act as the home base for handling a particular course. Instead of having to navigate to completely different pages, the frontend is built upon a single screen architecture, which has a tabbed interface, where the instructor can move through various contextual displays of the workspace data without having to leave the screen.
Workspace Info Tab
This tab shows the underlying metadata of workspace in figures 6-23 to 6-25.

Figure ‎6-23 Workspace Info Screen
Frontend - Info Tab
It displays read-only information (or editable options) of course title, course code, schedule overview, etc.

Figure ‎6-24 workspace_detail.dart
Backend - Info Tab
–
Figure ‎6-25 workspace_routes.py
Sections Tab
This tab deals with the various physical or virtual sections of the course presented along with its implementation in figures 6-26 to 6-30.




Figure ‎6-26 Add Section Popup Screen

Figure ‎6-27 Workspace Sections Screen
Frontend – Sections Tab 
The interface shows all active sections and indicates meeting times, meeting location and the number of enrolled in the section. It has an exclusive "Add Section" action, which opens a modal dialog or a form where the instructor can set new class times, room numbers and student capacity restrictions. It makes use of an internal state builder to make the updated list dynamic whenever a new section is formed.

Figure ‎6-28 workspace_sections.dart (CREATE)



Figure ‎6-29 workspace_sections.dart (READ)
Backend – Sections Tab
The CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations on the section table are done by the backend so that all sections are related to the parent workspace_id.

Figure ‎6-30 section_routes.py
Students Tab
The students tab is focused on the rosters and enrollment presented in figures 6-31 to 6-34.

Figure ‎6-31 Import Student List Screen

Frontend – Students Tab 
The UI displays a data table of enrolled students. It allows manual entry of forms and bulk upload of CSV files to generate rosters easily.

Figure ‎6-32 workspace_sections.dart (CREATE)


Figure ‎6-33 workspace_sections.darts (READ)
Backend – Students Tab 
In case of CSV upload, the backend will read the file and provide student records in the database and connect them to the workspace.

Figure ‎6-34 student_routes.py
Materials Screen & AI Generation Screen 
This perspective acts as the repository of files in the course and a starting point in generating content using AI. As you can see in figures 6-35 to 6-38.

Figure ‎6-35 Materials Screen

Figure ‎6-36 Assessment Configure Screen

Frontend - Materials Tab & AI Generation
This interface has a drag and drop section to add course materials. All uploaded files have a checkbox. A contextual Floating Action Button (Generate) is displayed when one (or more) materials are chosen. When you click on this it opens a configuration dialogue where the instructor could set the type of questions to be used (MCQ, Essay, True/False), the number of questions and their level of difficulty. These parameters and the document IDs that are chosen are then sent to the AI generation pipeline by the frontend.

Figure ‎6-37 workspace_detail.dart
Backend - Materials Tab & AI Generation
Multipart-form-uploaded files are uploaded into Firebase permanently and logged in the PostgreSQL. The generation request is forwarded to the AI service that retrieves the corresponding document embeddings and asks the LLM to provide structured questions of assessment.

Figure ‎6-38 Materials_routes.py
Assessments Screen
This perspective is employed to monitor planned student assessments, and it is also the main point of entry to trigger AI-powered content generation. Shown in figures 6-39 to 6-42.

Figure ‎6-39 Assessment Screen

Figure ‎6-40 Link Materials Screen
Frontend - Assessments 
When the user clicks, the UI parses the JSON schedule information in the workspace to create a chronological list of the forthcoming and past quizzes or assignments. It will have a manual connection interface in which instructors will be able to choose materials uploaded on it regarding a particular assessment. When materials are connected, a Generate action will be carried out and the instructor will be prompted to a configuration dialog where it is possible to set the type of questions (MCQ, Essay, True/False), the quantity of questions and the difficulty level. These parameters are then posted to the backend.

Figure ‎6-41 workspace_detail.dart
Backend - Assessments 
The FastAPI backend takes in the generation request and gets material records requested by the user in the PostgreSQL database. It loads the raw files of the cloud storage in memory, removes the text with format-specific libraries (pypdf, python-docx, python-pptx), and forms a complicated prompt. The prompt and extracted context are then sent to the OpenAI API (gpt-4o), which produces and gives out a structured JSON quiz.

Figure ‎6-42 quiz_routes.py


Review Screen
The Review screen is the final step to validate AI generated assessments, where instructors can review, edit and finalize the AI generated questions before saving or sharing them.You can check figures 6-43 to 6-52.

Figure ‎6-43 Review Screen
Frontend – Review Screen
The Flutter UI is passed the list of QuizQuestion objects that have been parsed from the generate function in the Materials screen. The frontend dynamically displays the questions with their multiple-choice options and the correct answer in text fields or cards. Teachers are given manual options to edit the generated text, remove unnecessary questions and add new questions to the list to ensure the quizzes meet their teaching standards. After the review, instructors confirm the saving or export through a "Confirm" button.

Figure ‎6-44 review_screen.dart (DISPLAY)

Figure ‎6-45 Manual Edit UI


Figure ‎6-46 AI Edit


Figure ‎6-47 review_screen.dart – Manual Edit

Figure ‎6-48 review_screen.dart – AI Edit

Figure ‎6-49 api_service.dart – AI Edit

Figure ‎6-50 Export Popup UI

Figure ‎6-51 review_screen.dart Export
Backend – Review Screen
After confirmation, the final list of questions is serialized into a JSON and transmitted in a POST request to the backend. The FastAPI server validates the data and securely persists in the final assessment in the PostgreSQL database, tying it to the workspace and assessment records.

Figure ‎6-52 quiz_routes.py – AI Edit
Ask AI Screen
This tab is a tab that can integrate artificial intelligence directly into the workspace in figures 6-53 to 6-55.

Figure ‎6-53 Ask AI Screen

Frontend -  Ask AI 
The interface resembles a chat room in which the instructor can request the AI to create quizzes, summarize content or recommend a schedule based on the data available in the workspace.

Figure ‎6-54 workspace_detail.dart

Backend -  Ask AI 
The backend is informed of the prompt by sending a Prompting Module to the PostgreSQL database (such as uploaded materials or syllabus text) to obtain all the necessary workspace context and forward a composed payload to the integrated LLM API (e.g., OpenAI/Gemini), returning the generated response to the frontend.

Figure ‎6-55 workspace_routes.py

Generate Encodings Screen
The Generate Encodings Screen is responsible for creating facial encodings for students and storing them in the database. These encodings are later used in the attendance process for face recognition. These are presented in figures 6-56 to 6-59.
This screen allows user to:
Enter a student ID 
Upload images 
Generate a facial encoding 
Override an existing encoding if necessary 
View students who already have encodings

Front end – Generate Encodings Screen
The user starts by entering the student ID, then selects one or more images from their device or by using drag-and-drop functionality. Once the required data is provided, the user can press the “Generate Encoding” button, during process	sing, a loading state is shown to inform the user that the system is working.
The front-end communicates with the backend using the uploadEncoding function defined in api_service.dart, which sends the student ID and selected images to the server. The system also uses the getEncodingStudents function to retrieve and display students who already have stored encodings, it also ensures that the user cannot proceed without entering a valid student ID and images.

Figure ‎6-57 generate_encodings_screen.dart – upload Function

Generate Encodings Screen -  Backend
The backend is responsible for processing the uploaded images and generating the facial encoding for the student. When the request is received, the system extracts the student ID and images sent from the front-end.
The encoding process is handled in face_recognizer.py, where the system receives the image as raw bytes directly in memory using the generate_encoding_from_image function, detects the face, and generates a numerical representation (encoding) for that face. The system then stores it in the database using the update_student_encoding function in PgAttendanceRepository (pg_repository.py). The backend also checks whether the student already has an existing encoding. If so, the system returns a response indicating that an override will happen before replacing the existing data.



Figure ‎6-59 attendnace_routes.py encoding/upload endpoint
Attendance Tab
The Attendance Tab provides interface that loads all course workspaces and their sections, which the instructor can tap to proceed to the attendance screen for that section. Check figures 6-60 and 6-61.
This screen allows the user to:
View all available course workspaces and their sections
Select a section to open the attendance screen

Figure ‎6-60 Attendnace Home Screen
Attendance Tab - Front end
The Attendance tab is embedded inside the workspace detail page as the _AttendanceTab widget in workspace_detail.dart. The sections list is built directly from the workspace data already loaded by the app, so no separate API call is needed. The screen shows a loading indicator while waiting and an error message if the data fails to load. Tapping a section card navigates to the AttendanceScreen with the workspace ID, section ID, and course title passed as parameters.

Figure ‎6-61 workspace_detail.dart - AttendanceTab
Attendance Screen 
The Attendance Screen has the responsibility of recording and managing student attendance for a specific course section. The screen opens with the course title and section passed from the previous screen, and immediately loads the student list, the last recorded lecture number, and any previously saved attendance for the current lecture. See figures 6-62 and 6-63.
This screen allows the user to:
Take attendance automatically by uploading or capturing a lecture video
Review and manually adjust the attendance status of each student
Confirm and save the final attendance to the database, and export it as a CSV file

Figure ‎6-62 Attendnace Screen

The screen provides a collapsible panel labelled "Take Attendance by Video" that allows the instructor to upload a pre-recorded video or capture one using the device camera. The instructor can upload up to two videos per session. Each uploaded video is shown with its filename and can be removed individually before processing.

Figure ‎6-63 Take Attendnace by Video Collapsible Panel
Take Attendance by Video 
Take Attendance by Video – Front end
The video panel is hidden by default and expands when the instructor taps the button. The instructor can either select a video from the device using pickAndUploadVideo, which opens a file picker filtered to video files, or record a new one using captureAndUploadVideo, which opens the device camera with a maximum duration of 30 seconds. A maximum of two videos can be selected per session. Each video is shown with its filename and can be removed individually before processing.


Figure ‎6-64 api_service.dart – uploadCheck Function
Once the videos are selected, the instructor presses the "Take Attendance" button which calls runPreview. This function sends all selected video files simultaneously to the backend using Future.wait, calling uploadCheck defined in api_service.dart for each video in parallel. Each call sends the video file along with the lecture number, workspace ID, and section ID. Once all videos are processed, the results are merged and reflected in the student list on screen.



Figure ‎6-65 api_service.dart - previewAttendnace Function
Take Attendance by Video – Backend
The backend handles video processing through the unified POST /attendance/process-video endpoint defined in attendance_routes.py. The endpoint receives the video file, saves it temporarily on the server, then immediately processes it in a single step. It loads the student encodings for the section using get_students_with_encodings from PgAttendanceRepository (pg_repository.py), then passes them to FaceRecognizer through set_known_faces. The video is then processed frame by frame in process_video_preview defined in attendance_service.py, where detect_faces is called on each frame to identify students. Once processing is complete, the temporary video file is deleted from the server and the full attendance results are returned directly in the response.

Figure ‎6-66 attendace_routes.py – attendance/process-video endpoint
Each time a student is detected, record_detection increments their detection count. After the video finishes, build_rows converts the detection memory into attendance rows, marking a student as Present if they were detected at least twice and Absent otherwise. The confidence level is also recorded according face distance that is returned by FaceRecognizer.


Figure ‎6-67 face_recognizer.py – detect_faces Function

Figure ‎6-68 attendnace_service.py – process_video_preview Function
Student List and Confirm Attendance 
After the video is processed, the results are reflected in the student list displayed on screen. The instructor can review the results and make modifications before saving.
the screen allows the instructor to:
Review the attendance status of each student as determined by the face recognition process
Manually mark or override any student's status as Present, Absent, or Excused
Mark all students as Present or Absent at once using the bulk action buttons
Confirm and save the final attendance to the database
Return to the screen at any time to make changes and save the updated attendance again

Figure ‎6-69 Confirm Attendance

Student List and Confirm Attendance – Front end
The student list is built from the previewRows list, which is populated when the screen loads by calling loadStudents and loadAttendanceForLecture. This means the instructor can also use the screen without processing video, by manually setting each student's status directly from the list, if attendance was previously saved for the selected lecture, it is loaded automatically and reflected in the list, allowing the instructor to review or override existing records.

Figure ‎6-70 api_service.dart – getStudentsForSection Function
Each student card is using the StudentCard widget that provides three buttons Present, Absent, and Excused which call setStatus to update that student's status in the list. The instructor can update all students with a single setAllStatus call by clicking the Present all and Absent all buttons. A row of pills with the number of present, absent, and excused students is displayed in real time.
When the instructor clicks "Confirm & Save" button that calls confirmAndSave. The function first checks that all students have been marked before proceeding. It then sends the attendance list to the backend using confirmAttendance in api_service.dart.

Figure ‎6-71 api_service.dart – confirmAttendnace Function
Student List and Confirm Attendance – Backend
The endpoint POST /attendance/confirm in attendance_routes.py receives the attendance rows along with the workspace ID, section ID, and lecture number. It passes them to save_attendance_for_lecture in PgAttendanceRepository (pg_repository.py), which first deletes any existing records for that lecture and then inserts the new rows. This replacement behavior ensures that whether the instructor is saving attendance for the first time or overriding a previous session, the database always reflects the latest confirmed result.

Figure ‎6-72 pg_repository.py - save_attendance_for_lecture
Export Attendance 
the instructor can export attendance as a CSV file. The screen provides two export options to cover different use cases.
This part of the screen allows the instructor to:
Export the attendance of the currently selected lecture as a CSV file
Export the attendance of a specific past lecture from the database
Export all lectures at once in a single CSV file

Figure ‎6-73 Export Attendance and Export from database Collapsible Panel
Export Attendance – Front end
The first option is the "Export Attendance" button which calls exportAttendance. This exports the attendance of the currently selected lecture number directly to the device's Downloads folder.
The second option is a collapsible panel "Export from database" that let the instrcutor enter any lecture number, and then press "Download CSV" to export that lecture. The panel also provides an "ALL" button which calls exportAllAttendance to export the attendance records of all lectures for that section in a single file. Before exporting a specific lecture, the system checks whether attendance has been recorded for it by verifying against the availableLectures list, and shows an error message if no records are found.
Both options use exportAttendanceCsvFromDb defined in api_service.dart to communicate with the backend. The exported file is named using the course title, section ID, and lecture number, and saved to the device using FileSaver.saveToDownloads. A confirmation message is shown to the instructor once the file is saved successfully.

Figure ‎6-74 api_service.dart – exportAttendnaceCsvFromDb Function


Figure ‎6-75 file_saver.dart – saveToDownloads Funtions
Export Attendance – Backend
Both export functions use exportAttendanceCsvFromDb in api_service.dart, which sends a request to the GET /export-attendance endpoint in attendance_routes.py. The endpoint queries the attendance table using fetch_attendance_rows in PgAttendanceRepository (pg_repository.py), passing the workspace ID, section ID, and lecture number. If no lecture number is provided, all records for that section are returned. The backend then formats the results and returns them as a downloadable CSV file to the frontend.

Figure ‎6-76 pg_repositories.py – fetch_attendance_rows Function

Figure ‎6-77 Saved to Downloads Attendance File

Figure ‎6-78 Attendance Record Generated for Lecture 8 DSA 61D

Statistics Screen 
The Statistics Screen provides the instructor with attendance summary for a course section. It is accessible from the Attendance Screen and displays each student's attendance record across recorded lectures, along with a warning level based on the number of absences.
This screen allows instructor to:
View the total number of recorded lectures and enrolled students
See each student's attendance percentage and breakdown of present, absent, and excused counts
Identify students at risk based on their absence count through a warning system
Download a warning report for any student who has reached the first warning or above

Figure ‎6-79 Statistics Screen


Statistics Screen – Front end
When the screen load, it first fetches the list of recorded lectures using getAvailableLectures, then loads the enrolled students using getStudentsForSection. It then fetches the attendance records for every lecture in parallel and send the results into a StudentStats object for each student tracking their present, absent, and excused counts.
The student list is sorted by risk level, so students with the highest number of absences appear at the top. A warning badge is shown on each card based on the getWarning function, which applies the following: 4 or more absences a 1st warning, 8 or more a 2nd warning, and 10 or more a 3rd warning. A summary bar at the top of the list shows the total count of students in each warning category.

Figure ‎6-80 statistics_screen.dart

For any student who has reached the 1st warning or above, a download button appears on their card. Pressing it calls downloadWarningReport in api.dart, which requests a generated warning report document from the backend. The file is then saved to the device using FileSaver.saveToDownloads. 
Statistics Screen – Backend
The statistics screen relies on the same endpoints used by the Attendance Screen GET /attendance/available-lectures, GET /attendance/students, and GET /attendance/lecture to load the data on the frontend side.
Warning report is generated using the POST /attendance/generate-warning-report endpoint defined in attendance_routes.py. It receives the workspace ID, section ID, student ID, and absence count, and uses them to produce a Word document that can be downloaded by the instructor.

Figure ‎6-81 attendance_routes.py – attendance/generate-warning-report endpoint


Figure ‎6-82 Generated Warning Report File
Notification and Scheduling 
The Notifications system gives instructors' notifications about upcoming class sessions. This system is designed to be quick and efficient by being entirely client-side and not relying on the server for calculations (a local scheduling system), and is encapsulated completely in the mobile and web applications.

Figure ‎6-83 Week Overview Notification


Figure ‎6-84 Notification History

Mobile Platforms: iOS and Android use the native background processing mechanisms. Upon the first update of the workspace, the scheduling component parses the class days and times, computes the precise target timestamp of the next weeks and schedules exact alarms with the operating system using the flutter_local_notifications package.
Web and Desktop Implementation: Web platforms do not support persistent background local notifications like mobile devices, so a fallback approach was implemented. The system serializes and stores the next class alerts in encrypted local storage. A background polling service (InAppQueue) periodically (every 20 seconds) scans the storage. Once the time elapses, the system fires a custom user toast overlay (MobileToastService) and uses JS interop (web_audio_impl.dart) to play a chime, ensuring users never miss a class.

Figure ‎6-85 notification_scheduler.dart scheduling logic


Figure ‎6-86 notification_service.dart mobile native setup

Figure ‎6-87 in_app_queue.dart web queue
CHAPTER VII 
TESTING
Testing is an essential component of the development of AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform and it ensures that the system is functioning correctly, reliably and according to the established functional and non-functional requirements as per capstone one. This chapter gives a systematic verification of the system by undergoing many testing stages, the accuracy of the individual parts and the system in its entirety in the eyes of the instructor. 
Complete coverage was obtained using a set of testing strategies. These include Equivalence Class Partitioning and Boundary Value Analysis to input validation, black-box functional testing to test the system behavior against the requirements and non-functional testing to test the system performance, security, usability and reliability. Additionally, core logic was tested using white-box unit testing, how the system components interacted with each other was tested using integration testing and how the real world instructor workflows were simulated was tested using system and acceptance testing. 
The Python test framework pytest was used to provide automated validation to test parts of the backend. This facilitated effective running of repetitive test instances, testing of service level logic and testing of edge cases in a controlled environment. Although manual testing was also conducted using the Flutter application to ensure that actual user interactions are as desired.
Equivalence Class Partitioning
Equivalence Class Partitioning is a testing method used to reduce the number of test cases while still covering all important scenarios. Instead of testing every possible input, similar inputs are grouped together into classes where they are expected to behave in the same way. One value from each group is then tested as a representative. In addition, Boundary Value Analysis is used to check the limits of these groups by testing values at the edges of the valid range.
User Password
Rule: 
Be ≥ 6 characters
Contain only alphanumeric characters
Not be empty
Equivalence Classes:
EC1 - Password length ≥ 6 characters (VALID)
EC2 - Password length < 6 characters (INVALID)
EC3: Alphanumeric only (VALID)
EC4: Contains non-alphanumeric (INVALID)
EC5: Empty input (INVALID)
Boundary Values:
Boundary values: BLB = 5 chars | LB = 6 chars | ALB = 7 chars
Table 9 : User Password

User Email Address	
Rules:  
not be empty
contain exactly one @
have valid structure (local + domain)
Equivalence Classes:
EC1: Email is not empty (VALID)
EC2: Email contains exactly one @ (VALID)
EC3: Email has valid local part (before @ is not empty) (VALID)
EC4: Email has valid domain part (after @ is not empty) (VALID)
EC5: Email is empty (INVALID)
EC6: Missing @ symbol (INVALID)
EC7: More than one @ symbol (INVALID)
EC8: Missing local part (e.g. @gmail.com) (INVALID)
EC9: Missing domain part (e.g. user@) (INVALID)
Table 10 :User Email Address

User Full Name (Sign Up)
Rule: 
not be empty
be at least 2 characters
contain only alphabetic characters
Equivalence Classes:
EC1: Input is not empty (VALID)
EC2: Length ≥ 2 characters (VALID)
EC3: Contains only alphabetic characters (VALID)
EC4: Empty input (INVALID)
EC5: Length < 2 characters (INVALID)
EC6: Contains numbers (INVALID)
EC7: Contains special characters (INVALID)
Boundary Values:
BLB = 1 char | LB = 2 chars | ALB = 3 chars

Table 11 :

Password Confirmation (Sign Up)
Rules: 
not be empty
match the original password exactly
Equivalence Classes:
EC1: Confirm password matches password exactly (VALID)
EC2: Confirm password is not empty (VALID)
EC3: Confirm password does not match password (INVALID)
EC4: Confirm password is empty (INVALID)
Table 12: Sign Up

Section Name 
When an instructor creates a section, the name field must not be empty and must follow a specific format. The section name must consist of exactly 2 digits followed by 1 alphabetic letter (e.g., 61D). Any input that does not match this pattern should be rejected.
EC1: Exactly 3 characters (2 digits + 1 letter) 
EC2: Empty input
EC3: Less than 3 characters 
EC4: More than 3 characters 
EC5: Not digit-digit-letter 
Boundary values:  BLB = 2 chars    | LB = 3 chars   |   ALB = 4 chars
Table 13: Section Name Equivalence Classes

Syllabus File Upload
The syllabus upload endpoint only accepts .pdf and .docx files. Anything else must be rejected. Two classes:
•       EC1 - File extension is .pdf or .docx (VALID)
•       EC2 -  Any other extension .txt, .jpg, .xlsx, etc. (INVALID)
Table 14: Syllabus Upload File Type Equivalence Classes

Student Roster (List) Upload
The student import endpoint accepts .csv, .xlsx, and .xls files. Anything else is rejected. Two classes:
•       EC1 - File extension is .csv, .xlsx, or .xls (VALID)
•       EC2 - Any other extension (INVALID)
Table 15: Student List File Type Equivalence Classes

Functional Testing (Black-Box)
Functional testing checks that the system does what it is supposed to do from the user's perspective. We treat the API as a black box, we send requests that a real instructor would make, and we verify the system responds correctly.
Workspace Management (FR5–FR10)
These tests simulate everything an instructor would do with a workspace such as uploading a syllabus, checking it was created, editing its course details, and deleting it when the semester ends.
Table 16: Workspace Management Functional Tests

Section Management
These tests cover adding sections to a workspace, renaming them, giving them a room number and schedule, and removing them.
Table 17: Section Management Functional Tests

Ask AI Feature (FR46–FR48)
These tests cover the AI chat feature where an instructor can type a question about the syllabus and get an answer back from the AI.
Table 18: Ask AI Functional Tests

Attendance Functional Testing (FR18–FR28)
The test cases below verify the end-to-end process of the Generate Quiz screen: material selection (local files or database), configuration of the question type, AI generation and navigation to.the Review screen. All test cases are run as black box tests with specified inputs and. observable expected outputs.
Table 19: Attendance Functional Tests


Figure ‎7-1 TC-B2

Figure ‎7-2 TC-B3

Figure ‎7-3 TC-B5

Figure ‎7-4 TC-B7
Assessment Generation Testing (FR29–FR37)
The following test cases validate the end-to-end flow of the Generate Quiz screen: material selection (local files or database), question-type configuration, AI generation, and navigation to the Review screen. Each test case is executed as a black-box scenario with defined inputs and observable expected outputs.
Table 20: Material Selection Functional Tests

Table 21: File Type Validation Functional Tests


Table 22: Question Type Configuration Functional Tests

Table 23: Review and Edit Functional Tests

Table 24: Error Handling and Edge Case Functional Tests

Non-Functional Testing
Non-functional testing is not what the system does, but rather the behavior of the system. These are such aspects as the ease of navigation, the smoothness with which it manages odd inputs, and even the predictability of the response structure such that the Flutter mobile app can count on it. These attributes are not only as important as the features themselves, such as does it respond fast enough? Is it secure in data of the instructor? Does it provide a useful message when something is wrong? In this section, we record the way we tested each of those qualities. We validated these using actual Python scripts that used our live backend on Render and measured real results.
Performance (NFR 17 and NFR 18)
NFR 17 - Dashboard must load in under 10 seconds
We had to test the speed at which the primary screen of the application, the list of workspaces, would load so that an instructor can use it without being frustrated. We wrote a Python script to test this by calling the workspace list 20 times in succession and measuring the time it took to do so with the Python time module. We then determined the mean response time of all 20 calls.
As our backend is on the free plan of Render, the initial couple of calls are always slower than others. This is because when no one is using the server, Render goes to sleep and first requests to wake it up. It is a hosting issue, rather than an issue with the app. To be fair, we also calculated a 'warm average' that excludes the first two wake-up calls. 
Results: noticeably, the average was 5,327 ms and the warm average was 5,294 ms. Both are comfortably under the 10,000 ms target. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-5 Dashboard must load in under 10 seconds

NFR 18 - AI summaries must be ready in under 15 seconds
We had to test it and asked the AI to answer 5 various questions, such as: 1) Give me an overview of the grading policy, 2) What is the final exam and what is the percentage worth? Each question was timed by us with respect to the time when it was sent and the time when the answer was returned. This involves the duration of the search process by the system through the chunks of the syllabus and the duration taken by GPT to produce the answer.
Results: the average across all 5 questions was 6,739 ms. The fastest answer came back in 3,997 ms and the slowest took 10,019 ms. All were under the 15,000 ms target. The test passed.


Figure ‎7-6 AI summaries must be ready in under 15 seconds

Scalability (NFR 17 and NFR 18 under load)
NFR 17 is not solely concerned with speed to one individual, the system must remain stable when it is used by more than one instructor at once. To approximate the time behavior of uploading a syllabus, we emulated 10 instructors concurrently uploading a syllabus at the same time using the threading module of Python, which allows you to initiate many requests at the same time rather than sequentially. 
Results: all 10 upload requests returned HTTP 200. None of them crashed, timed out, or produced an error. The test passed with 10 out of 10 succeeding.

Figure ‎7-7. 10 instructors uploading at the same time

This time we ran the same threading strategy except that 5 instructors posed a question to the AI simultaneously. Each 5 requests responded with HTTP 200, which is an indication that the server did not crash. The reaction times, however, were much slower with concurrent loading: the mean was approximately 31 seconds with the shortest at 13 seconds and the longest at 39 seconds.
This is more than the 15 seconds target in NFR 18. But this is due to the fact that Render has a free tier, which restricts the amount of CPU that the server can utilize at a given time, 5 AI requests coming in simultaneously cause them to be queued and each request must wait. It is a hosting limitation and not a bug in the application code. The response times of the concurrents would be significantly lower on a paid server with increased resources. We recorded this as a known limitation and not a failure because there were no failures in any of the 5 requests.

Figure ‎7-8. 5 instructors asking the AI at the same time

Security (NFR 7, NFR 8, NFR 11)
NFR 7 - Unauthorized access is blocked
We experimented with two things. To begin with, we attempted to open up a workspace with an entirely fabricated ID and we were imitating the case of an individual attempting to guess a URL or enter a workspace that had been deleted. The system responded to the HTTP 404 and displayed the message of workspace not found and displayed no data whatsoever. Second, we attempted to add a section to a workspace with a spoofed ID, same result, HTTP 404. Both tests passed.

Figure ‎7-9 Unauthorized access is blocked
NFR 8 - API keys and passwords are never exposed
We use an OpenAI API key to enable the AI chat feature in our backend. We had to ensure that this key or any other sensitive values do not accidentally make it to what the app returns to the user. We downloaded the workspace list and searched the full text of the response for 6 patterns appearing like secrets: sk- (how OpenAI keys begin), api-key, secret, password, token, and private-key. None of them seemed to be mentioned anywhere in the reply. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-10 API keys and passwords are never exposed
NFR 11 - AI content only accessible with a valid workspace ID
We tried to ask the AI a question about a workspace that does not exist, using a random made-up ID. The system returned HTTP 404 and gave no answer. This confirms that the AI chat is protected, you cannot get answers about a course unless you know its real workspace ID. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-11 AI content only accessible with a valid workspace ID
Wrong file types are refused before processing
Three types of files that were not correct were uploaded to the syllabus upload page: a .txt file, a .jpg image, and a .xlsx spreadsheet. All of them were denied without processing and with an HTTP 415. The error message had a clear list of the types of files that are actually permitted. This is of significance in terms of security since it implies that unsolicited or potentially malicious files are prevented at the entry-point. All three types of files were passed.

Figure ‎7-12 Wrong file types are refused before processing
Usability (NFR 3)
According to NFR 3, when something goes wrong the system should provide the instructor with a message that not only describes what has occurred but it does so in a way that makes sense and not a blank screen or a mysterious technical error message. We tried this by causing three typical errors:
First, we filled in a section form with the name field blank. The system sent a readable validation message with the problem giving a 422 status. Second, we posted a PDF document on the student import screen (only CSV and XLSX). The system gave an HTTP 415 response with the text showing Unsupported file type .pdf. Allowed: .csv, .xls, .xlsx', which informs the instructor on what to do instead. Third, we attempted to open a workspace that does not exist, and the system responded with HTTP 404 with the message of Workspace not found. The three error messages were understandable and suitable. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-13 Unsupported file type

Figure ‎7-14 Workspace not found
Data Storage and Reliability (NFR 26, NFR 29)
NFR 26 - Workspaces are stored and can always be retrieved
We uploaded a workspace and then immediately fetched it back using its ID. The system returned the correct workspace with the same ID both times. Nothing was lost between the upload and the retrieval. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-15 Workspaces are stored and can always be retrieved

We also tested that uploading the same syllabus file twice does not create two copies. The system uses a SHA-256 hash (a unique fingerprint of the file) to detect duplicates. On the first upload, already_uploaded was False and a new workspace was created. On the second upload with the exact same file, already_uploaded was True and no new workspace was created, both uploads returned the same workspace ID. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-16 uploading same syllabus file twice does not create two copies
NFR 29 - All workspaces are available when the instructor opens the app
We faked the scenario where an instructor closes and re-opens the app by calling the workspace list fresh, precisely what the Flutter app does each time it starts up. The system responded with HTTP 200 with a list of 25 workspaces all having their respective IDs and statuses. Nothing was missing. It was always a proper list, and not null, which is important, as the Flutter app would stop functioning in case it obtains a null, rather than an empty list. Both checks passed.

Figure ‎7-17 All workspaces are available
NFR 16 - The system shall process a classroom attendance video (≤ 30 seconds) in under 30 seconds.
We tested whether attendance preview generation is fast enough for practical use by uploading a classroom video and measuring how long the system took to process the video and return attendance results. The preview completed in 23,712 ms, which is below the 30-second target. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-18 attendance generation is fast for practical use

NFR 14 - Every attendance preview row must include a confidence value.
We tested whether every attendance preview row includes a confidence value required. After running attendance preview, all returned rows contained the confidence field. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-19 all returned rows contain confidence
NFR 9 / NFR 28 Privacy Protection
We tested whether uploaded classroom videos are handled securely by verifying the video exists during processing and checking that deletion occurs after confirmation. The lifecycle behavior was verified. The test passed.

Figure ‎7-20 classroom videos are handled securely
Unit Testing (White-Box)
White-box testing goes one level deeper, instead of testing the API from the outside, we test the individual service functions internally. We mock the database so that no actual DB is required and we intentionally put the code into particular states (such as a missing workspace or an empty file) to ensure that all the branches are exercised.
ExportService Unit Testing
Table 25:ExportService

FileHashService
This service computes a SHA-256 hash of every uploaded file. The hash is what allows the system to detect duplicate uploads. Because we know it uses hashlib.sha256 internally, we can verify the exact expected output.

Figure ‎7-21 Test FileHashService
SectionService
The create_section() function has two main branches: one where the workspace does not exist (should raise an error) and one where it does (should create the section with a fresh ID). A third branch is present when the schedule details are missing and applies safe default values.


Figure ‎7-22 Test SectionService
WorkspaceService, Duplicate Upload Guard
When a file is uploaded, the service computes its hash and checks it against all existing workspaces. If a match is found, it returns immediately with already_uploaded=True and skips saving. If no match is found, it creates a new workspace. Both branches are tested by controlling what the mocked repository returns.

Figure ‎7-23 TestWorkSpaceService
Notifications (Brief) (FR41–FR45)
Notification scheduling runs entirely on the client side (Flutter) so there is no HTTP endpoint to test. Instead we test the internal time-parsing logic that decides when to fire a reminder. These are quick unit tests, we call the function directly and check the output.
Table 26:  Notification Scheduler Tests

Unit Testing - Attendance Logic
These tests validate the internal attendance algorithm responsible for determining Present/Absent status, confidence handling, manual overrides, and resetting detection state.
Table 27: Attendance Unit Test Results

Table 28: Unit Test Results

Overall Results
All test cases passed. The full automated test suite was run using pytest:


Figure ‎7-24 Overall Results
Integration Testing
Integration testing checks that the different parts of the system work correctly together with data flowing properly between modules,  not just in isolation. 
Login + Sign Up + Assessment Generation
Table 29: Login + Sign Up + Assessment Generation

Work Space + Attendance
Table 30: Work Space + Attendance

System Testing
System testing runs complete instructor workflows from start to finish. These tests are not about individual endpoints or functions, they simulate exactly what a real instructor would do during a semester. We ran these tests using the fully deployed InstructorMate backend on Render and the Attendance backend running locally, together with the Flutter app on a real Android device.
Each test walks through a multi-step scenario. A test only passes if every step succeeds and the final state of the app matches what the instructor would expect to see.










Table 31: System Testing

Acceptance Testing
The most significant question is the one that is answered by acceptance testing: whether the system does what we promised it to do. All of these test cases are directly related to user stories that were written at the beginning of the project. What we are testing is the product and not the code, the person who will use it daily is the instructor.
These tests we did manually with the Flutter app on a real Android device, following each user story like we were an instructor and establishing a new course the first time.
Table 32: Acceptance Testing

Problems Faced and How We Solved Them
Ultimately, we have documented all major issues we have learned during development and testing. Problems that involved a real design decision or code change that was not trivial were included only. Minor details such as typos in error messages were corrected directly and are not shown here.
Under each problem we describe what is wrong in simple terms, and where it was in the code, what effect it had on the instructor using the app, and what we actually changed to correct it. Being honest
about problems and how they were solved is an important part of the development process, rather than just claiming it worked perfectly.




Table 33:Problem Faced
 
PR-01 (notification duplicate-time) and PR-4 (concurrent AI timing on free hosting) remain open. Neither affects the core instructor workflow. PR-01 is a client-side scheduling edge case and PR-4 is a hosting constraint that would not occur on a paid production server. Both are documented here so they can be addressed before the app reaches real users.
Overall Test Coverage Summary
The table below brings together every test case across all testing levels completed in this chapter. We covered the full testing pyramid: individual functions validated by white-box unit tests, components working together confirmed by integration tests, complete user journeys exercised by system tests, and the product verified against its original user stories by acceptance testing.

This chapter provides a complete review of the AI-Powered Instructor Assistance Platform through many levels of testing, including equivalence class testing, functional testing, non-functional testing, unit testing, integration testing, system testing, and acceptance testing.   Together, these tests evaluated both the validity of individual components and the behavior of the full system against the original functional and non-functional criteria. 
The results showed that the system successfully meets the great majority of its previously set requirements. Core capabilities such as authentication, workspace administration, AI-assisted conversation, attendance processing, assessment generating, and data handling were validated by successful test execution. Non-functional requirements such as performance, security, usability.
and reliability, were also examined and found appropriate through
automated and manual testing.Pytest-based automated tests were used to check repeated verification.
Worth mentioning, restrictions or faults, such as concurrent AI response delays caused by server constraints and the notification scheduling edge case, these were documented clearly as known. Additionally, problems and corrective actions or improvements in the future are specified.



CHAPTER VIII
CONCLUSION
This capstone project addresses a problem: instructors manages their teaching, administrative, and coordination responsibilities across multiple fragmented tools. This leads to effort duplication, increased workload, and reduced time for meaningful teaching. The goal of this project was to design and implement a unified, AI-powered platform that consolidates the most important instructor tasks into a single environment.
Capstone I focused on the analysis, specification, and architectural design of the platform. Functional and non-functional requirements, use-case models, UML diagrams, and a system architecture that served as the foundation for implementation. Capstone II delivered the working prototype of the system, using a Flutter mobile frontend connected to a FastAPI backend with a NeonDB PostgreSQL database.
The implemented system successfully integrates core features. The first is an attendance system that uses facial recognition to automatically detect and record student attendance from classroom videos, and generate warning reports for students. The second is an assessment and quiz generation that uses large language models to generate quizzes and assessments from uploaded course materials. The third is a course workspace management system that allows instructors to create workspaces, organize sections, manage student lists, and track all course related activities from a single screen. The fourth is an AI document assistant that allows instructors to ask questions that the system answers. The fifth is an attendance statistics and analytics screen that provides instructors view of each student's attendance record, warning level, and overall attendance percentage across all recorded lectures.

FUTURE WORK
The Instructor-Mate platform successfully implemented core features, several planned functionalities were not included and represent clear directions for future development.
The Daily and Weekly Teaching Assistant module was planned to display the scheduled topic, learning objectives, and required materials for each class session based on the semester plan, provide a daily class preparation checklist, generate weekly summaries that bring together attendance statistics, covered topics, and pending tasks, and allow instructors to mark tasks as completed and compare their teaching progress against the original semester plan. These features were designed to give instructors a structured overview of their workload on a day to day and week to week basis and remain an important addition for a future version of the platform.
The Course File and Coordination Reporting module was originally planned to automatically generate a range of course related reports including weekly class summaries, coordination start-up reports, coordination meeting reports, course improvement proposals, and CLO assessment reports, all exportable in Word or PDF format. This module addresses one of the most time consuming administrative burdens that instructors face and was identified in Capstone I as a core motivation for the project. Implementing this module in a future version would significantly reduce the manual documentation effort currently required of instructors.
The cross campus coordination module was planned to help instructors managing common courses across multiple sections or campuses to schedule meetings, share progress reports, and collaborate on course alignment from within the platform.
The administrator interface for viewing registered instructor accounts, configuring system settings, and managing AI service keys. This not implemented in the current prototype and would be necessary before any institutional deployment of the platform.
Full integration with existing institutional systems such as Moodle and university registration platforms would allow the system to automatically synchronize student data and course without requiring manual imports.

References
S. Al Mahmud, A. Kamarulariffin, A. M. Ibrahim, and others, “Advancements and challenges in mobile robot navigation: A comprehensive review of algorithms and potential for self-learning approaches”, J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 110, art. no. 120, Aug. 2024. doi: 10.1007/s10846-024-02149-5. 
Workload in a Research-Intensive University: A Case Study, 2023.
Impact of Workload on Teachers' Efficiency and Their Students' Academic Achievement at the University Level (PDF), 2023.
M. A. Bojiah, “Effectiveness of Moodle in Teaching and Learning,” Journal of Hunan University Natural Sciences, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1255–1259, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.jonuns.com/index.php/journal/article/view/1259/1253
R. Abbas and M. Saeed, “Impact of Workload on Teachers' Efficiency and Their Students' Academic Achievement at the University Level,” ResearchGate, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/371873877_Impact_of_Workload_on_Teachers%27_Efficiency_and_Their_Students%27_Academic_Achievement_at_the_University_Level
Wake Forest University, “Faculty and Student Burnout: A Campus-Wide Survey,” 2024.
BBC News, “University Lecturers Report Rising Illness Due to Overwork,” 2024.
P. Avgeriou, S. Retalis, and E. Skordalakis, “An Architecture for Open Learning Management Systems,” in Software Architecture, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 70–79. doi: 10.1007/3-540-38076-0_13.
Ziarani, R. J., & Ravanmehr, R. (2021). Serendipity in recommender systems: A systematic literature review. [1] O. Zawacki-Richter, V. I. Marín, M. Bond, and F. Gouverneur, “Systematic review of research on artificial intelligence applications in higher education—Where are the educators?,” International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 39, 2019, doi: 10.1186/s41239-019-0171-0.
Y. K. Dwivedi et al., “So what if ChatGPT wrote it? Multidisciplinary perspectives on opportunities, challenges and implications of generative conversational AI for research, practice and policy,” International Journal of Information Management, vol. 71, p. 102642, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102642.
E. L. Anderson and D. H. Stinebrickner, “A Framework to Assess Higher Education Faculty Workload in U.S. Universities,” Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 559–573, 2020.
V. De Caro-Barek, M. Busse, J. Plank and A. Krause, “The Journey of an Innovative Cross-Campus Hybrid Learning Space: Challenges and Lessons Learned,” Frontiers in Education, vol. 9, 2024, Art. 1330804.
C. Yao, “A Cross-Campus Collaborative Model for College English Teaching Reform,” Journal of Humanities and Education Development, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 45–52, 2025.
S. Özkan and B. Kaya, “Impact of Workload and Role Expectations on Faculty in Higher Education Institutions,” Kastamonu University Journal of Education, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 533–548, 2023.
M. Finnie-Ansley, C. Denny, P. Luxton-Reilly, and B. Tempero, “The robots are coming: Exploring the implications of OpenAI Codex on introductory programming,” in Proc. 24th Australasian Computing Education Conf., 2022, pp. 10–19.
A. Vaithilingam, N. Zhang, and E. Glassman, “Expectation vs. experience: Evaluating code generation tools with programmers,” in Proc. 2022 CHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 2022, Paper 332.
S. Lee and T. Kim, “Multilingual support in AI-based learning systems: Enhancing inclusivity in higher education,” Computers & Education: AI, vol. 5, p. 100179, 2024.
J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), vol. 35, pp. 24824–24837, 2022.
L. Reynolds and K. McDonell, “Prompt programming for large language models: Beyond the few-shot paradigm,” Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 2021.
A. Mishra and A. K. Yadav, “Educational prompt design for AI-assisted learning environments,” Computers & Education: Artificial Intelligence, vol. 4, p. 100162, 2023.
S. Williamson, “Ethical implications of AI-driven learning environments,” Computers & Education, vol. 191, p. 104632, 2023.
T. Heaven and A. Peters, “Responsible AI in higher education: Opportunities and safeguards,” IEEE Trans. Educ., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 178–186, 2024.
M. Mehrabi et al., “A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021.
C. Cotton and J. Sloane, “AI writing assistants and academic integrity: Policy responses in higher education,” Int. J. Educ. Integrity, vol. 20, no. 1, 2024.
N. Papamitsiou and A. Economides, “Privacy and ethical challenges in learning analytics and AI-based systems,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 137, 2023.
B. Chen et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence in education: Principles and practices,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 15120–15134, 2024.
[P. Avgeriou, S. Retalis, and E. Skordalakis, “An Architecture for Open Learning Management Systems,” Software Architecture, Springer, 2003.
I. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 10th ed., Pearson, 2016.
B. Chen et al., “Explainable Artificial Intelligence in Education: Principles and Practices,” IEEE Access, 2024.
O. Zawacki-Richter et al., “Systematic Review of Research on Artificial Intelligence in Higher Education,” Int. J. Educ. Tech. Higher Educ., 2019.
A. Al-Ajlan and H. Zedan, “Why Moodle,” IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd ed., Addison-Wesley, 2013.


Appendix A — Supplementary Use Case Descriptions
🔹 UC01 – Manage Course Workspace


🔹 UC02 – Generate Assessment

UC03 – View & Mark Daily and Weekly Tasks


UC04 – Download/Export Files and Reports


UC05 – Seek Instructional Help / Chat





UC06 – Generate Course Reports


UC07 – Record Attendance

UC08 – Receive Notifications



UC09 – Configure System


UC10 – Review Feedback


UC11 – Manage Instructor Accounts


UC12 – Configure Assessment


Appendix B: Functional Requirements Catalogue




Appendix


Table 34:


Table 1: Material Selection Functional Tests
 
Table 2: File Type Validation Functional Tests
 
Table 3: Question Type Configuration Functional Tests
 
Table 4: Review and Edit Functional Tests
 
Table 5: Error Handling and Edge Case Functional Tests

